 a grunt.

"understand?" the other thundered with abrupt fierceness.

"yes," beauty smith grunted, shrinking away.

"yes what?"

"yes, sir," beauty smith snarled.

"look out!  he'll bite!" some one shouted, and a guffaw of laughter went
up.

scott turned his back on him, and returned to help the dog-musher, who
was working over white fang.

some of the men were already departing; others stood in groups, looking
on and talking.  tim keenan joined one of the groups.

"who's that mug?" he asked.

"weedon scott," some one answered.

"and who in hell is weedon scott?" the faro-dealer demanded.

"oh, one of them crackerjack minin' experts.  he's in with all the big
bugs.  if you want to keep out of trouble, you'll steer clear of him,
that's my talk.  he's all hunky with the officials.  the gold
commissioner's a special pal of his."

"i thought he must be somebody," was the faro-dealer's comment.  "that's
why i kept my hands offen him at the start."



chapter v--the indomitable


"it's hopeless," weedon
 
 ___________________________
 
bin and stared at the dog-musher, who
responded with a shrug that was equally hopeless.

together they looked at white fang at the end of his stretched chain,
bristling, snarling, ferocious, straining to get at the sled-dogs.  having
received sundry lessons from matt, said lessons being imparted by means
of a club, the sled-dogs had learned to leave white fang alone; and even
then they were lying down at a distance, apparently oblivious of his
existence.

"it's a wolf and there's no taming it," weedon scott announced.

"oh, i don't know about that," matt objected.  "might be a lot of dog in
'm, for all you can tell.  but there's one thing i know sure, an' that
there's no gettin' away from."

the dog-musher paused and nodded his head confidentially at moosehide
mountain.

"well, don't be a miser with what you know," scott said sharply, after
waiting a suitable length of time.  "spit it out.  what is it?"

the dog-musher indicated white fang with a backward thrust of his thumb.

"wolf or dog, it's a
 
 ___________________________
 
pon
his head.  white fang shrank together and grew tense as he crouched under
it.  here was danger, some treachery or something.  he knew the hands of
the gods, their proved mastery, their cunning to hurt.  besides, there
was his old antipathy to being touched.  he snarled more menacingly,
crouched still lower, and still the hand descended.  he did not want to
bite the hand, and he endured the peril of it until his instinct surged
up in him, mastering him with its insatiable yearning for life.

weedon scott had believed that he was quick enough to avoid any snap or
slash.  but he had yet to learn the remarkable quickness of white fang,
who struck with the certainty and swiftness of a coiled snake.

scott cried out sharply with surprise, catching his torn hand and holding
it tightly in his other hand.  matt uttered a great oath and sprang to
his side.  white fang crouched down, and backed away, bristling, showing
his fangs, his eyes malignant with menace.  now he could expect a beating
as fearful a
 
 ___________________________
 
s any he had received from beauty smith.

"here!  what are you doing?" scott cried suddenly.

matt had dashed into the cabin and come out with a rifle.

"nothin'," he said slowly, with a careless calmness that was assumed,
"only goin' to keep that promise i made.  i reckon it's up to me to kill
'm as i said i'd do."

"no you don't!"

"yes i do.  watch me."

as matt had pleaded for white fang when he had been bitten, it was now
weedon scott's turn to plead.

"you said to give him a chance.  well, give it to him.  we've only just
started, and we can't quit at the beginning.  it served me right, this
time.  and--look at him!"

white fang, near the corner of the cabin and forty feet away, was
snarling with blood-curdling viciousness, not at scott, but at the dog-
musher.

"well, i'll be everlastingly gosh-swoggled!" was the dog-musher's
expression of astonishment.

"look at the intelligence of him," scott went on hastily.  "he knows 
 
 ___________________________
 
an with the movement, and increased as the movement
approached its culmination.  but the moment before the rifle came to a
level on him, he leaped sidewise behind the corner of the cabin.  matt
stood staring along the sights at the empty space of snow which had been
occupied by white fang.

the dog-musher put the rifle down solemnly, then turned and looked at his
employer.

"i agree with you, mr. scott.  that dog's too intelligent to kill."



chapter vi--the love-master


as white fang watched weedon scott approach, he bristled and snarled to
advertise that he would not submit to punishment.  twenty-four hours had
passed since he had slashed open the hand that was now bandaged and held
up by a sling to keep the blood out of it.  in the past white fang had
experienced delayed punishments, and he apprehended that such a one was
about to befall him.  how could it be otherwise?  he had committed what
was to him sacrilege, sunk his fangs into the holy flesh of a god, and of
a white-skinned superior go
 
 ___________________________
 
g movement
slowly and carefully changed to a rubbing of the ears about their bases,
and the physical pleasure even increased a little.  yet he continued to
fear, and he stood on guard, expectant of unguessed evil, alternately
suffering and enjoying as one feeling or the other came uppermost and
swayed him.

"well, i'll be gosh-swoggled!"

so spoke matt, coming out of the cabin, his sleeves rolled up, a pan of
dirty dish-water in his hands, arrested in the act of emptying the pan by
the sight of weedon scott patting white fang.

at the instant his voice broke the silence, white fang leaped back,
snarling savagely at him.

matt regarded his employer with grieved disapproval.

"if you don't mind my expressin' my feelin's, mr. scott, i'll make free
to say you're seventeen kinds of a damn fool an' all of 'em different,
an' then some."

weedon scott smiled with a superior air, gained his feet, and walked over
to white fang.  he talked soothingly to him, but not for long, then
slowly put out his hand, re
 
 ___________________________
 
arly, "but you missed the chance
of your life when you was a boy an' didn't run off an' join a circus."

white fang snarled at the sound of his voice, but this time did not leap
away from under the hand that was caressing his head and the back of his
neck with long, soothing strokes.

it was the beginning of the end for white fang--the ending of the old
life and the reign of hate.  a new and incomprehensibly fairer life was
dawning.  it required much thinking and endless patience on the part of
weedon scott to accomplish this.  and on the part of white fang it
required nothing less than a revolution.  he had to ignore the urges and
promptings of instinct and reason, defy experience, give the lie to life
itself.

life, as he had known it, not only had had no place in it for much that
he now did; but all the currents had gone counter to those to which he
now abandoned himself.  in short, when all things were considered, he had
to achieve an orientation far vaster than the one he had achieved at the

 
 ___________________________
 
asticity of youth was no
longer his; when the fibre of him had become tough and knotty; when the
warp and the woof of him had made of him an adamantine texture, harsh and
unyielding; when the face of his spirit had become iron and all his
instincts and axioms had crystallised into set rules, cautions, dislikes,
and desires.

yet again, in this new orientation, it was the thumb of circumstance that
pressed and prodded him, softening that which had become hard and
remoulding it into fairer form.  weedon scott was in truth this thumb.  he
had gone to the roots of white fang's nature, and with kindness touched
to life potencies that had languished and well-nigh perished.  one such
potency was _love_.  it took the place of _like_, which latter had been
the highest feeling that thrilled him in his intercourse with the gods.

but this love did not come in a day.  it began with _like_ and out of it
slowly developed.  white fang did not run away, though he was allowed to
remain loose, because he liked this
 
 ___________________________
 
hat he should have some god.  the lordship of man was a need
of his nature.  the seal of his dependence on man had been set upon him
in that early day when he turned his back on the wild and crawled to grey
beaver's feet to receive the expected beating.  this seal had been
stamped upon him again, and ineradicably, on his second return from the
wild, when the long famine was over and there was fish once more in the
village of grey beaver.

and so, because he needed a god and because he preferred weedon scott to
beauty smith, white fang remained.  in acknowledgment of fealty, he
proceeded to take upon himself the guardianship of his master's property.
he prowled about the cabin while the sled-dogs slept, and the first night-
visitor to the cabin fought him off with a club until weedon scott came
to the rescue.  but white fang soon learned to differentiate between
thieves and honest men, to appraise the true value of step and carriage.
the man who travelled, loud-stepping, the direct line to the cabi
 
 ___________________________
 
n door,
he let alone--though he watched him vigilantly until the door opened and
he received the endorsement of the master.  but the man who went softly,
by circuitous ways, peering with caution, seeking after secrecy--that was
the man who received no suspension of judgment from white fang, and who
went away abruptly, hurriedly, and without dignity.

weedon scott had set himself the task of redeeming white fang--or rather,
of redeeming mankind from the wrong it had done white fang.  it was a
matter of principle and conscience.  he felt that the ill done white fang
was a debt incurred by man and that it must be paid.  so he went out of
his way to be especially kind to the fighting wolf.  each day he made it
a point to caress and pet white fang, and to do it at length.

at first suspicious and hostile, white fang grew to like this petting.
but there was o
 
 ___________________________
 
 till it ended.  but it was a
growl with a new note in it.  a stranger could not hear this note, and to
such a stranger the growling of white fang was an exhibition of
primordial savagery, nerve-racking and blood-curdling.  but white fang's
throat had become harsh-fibred from the making of ferocious sounds
through the many years since his first little rasp of anger in the lair
of his cubhood, and he could not soften the sounds of that throat now to
express the gentleness he felt.  nevertheless, weedon scott's ear and
sympathy were fine enough to catch the new note all but drowned in the
fierceness--the note that was the faintest hint of a croon of content and
that none but he could hear.

as the days went by, the evolution of _like_ into _love_ was accelerated.
white fang himself began to grow aware of it, though in his consciousness
he knew not what love was.  it manifested itself to him as a void in his
being--a hungry, aching, yearning void that clamoured to be filled.  it
was a pain and an unr
 
 ___________________________
 
.  they gave trail to him when he came and
went or walked among them, and when he asserted his will they obeyed.

in the same way, he came to tolerate matt--as a possession of his master.
his master rarely fed him.  matt did that, it was his business; yet white
fang divined that it was his master's food he ate and that it was his
master who thus fed him vicariously.  matt it was who tried to put him
into the harness and make him haul sled with the other dogs.  but matt
failed.  it was not until weedon scott put the harness on white fang and
worked him, that he understood.  he took it as his master's will that
matt should drive him and work him just as he drove and worked his
master's other dogs.

different from the mackenzie toboggans were the klondike sleds with
runners under them.  and different was the method of driving the dogs.
there was no fan-formation of the team.  the dogs worked in single file,
one behind another, hauling on double traces.  and here, in the klondike,
the leader was indee
 
 ___________________________
 
ed.  but, though he
worked in the sled in the day, white fang did not forego the guarding of
his master's property in the night.  thus he was on duty all the time,
ever vigilant and faithful, the most valuable of all the dogs.

"makin' free to spit out what's in me," matt said one day, "i beg to
state that you was a wise guy all right when you paid the price you did
for that dog.  you clean swindled beauty smith on top of pushin' his face
in with your fist."

a recrudescence of anger glinted in weedon scott's grey eyes, and he
muttered savagely, "the beast!"

in the late spring a great trouble came to white fang.  without warning,
the love-master disappeared.  there had been warning, but white fang was
unversed in such things and did not understand the packing of a grip.  he
remembered afterwards that his packing had preceded the master's
disappearance; but at the time he suspected nothing.  that night he
waited for the master to return.  at midnight the chill wind that blew
drove him to shelter a
 
 ___________________________
 
e crouched, and waited.

but no master came.  in the morning the door opened and matt stepped
outside.  white fang gazed at him wistfully.  there was no common speech
by which he might learn what he wanted to know.  the days came and went,
but never the master.  white fang, who had never known sickness in his
life, became sick.  he became very sick, so sick that matt was finally
compelled to bring him inside the cabin.  also, in writing to his
employer, matt devoted a postscript to white fang.

weedon scott reading the letter down in circle city, came upon the
following:

"that dam wolf won't work.  won't eat.  aint got no spunk left.  all the
dogs is licking him.  wants to know what has become of you, and i don't
know how to tell him.  mebbe he is going to die."

it was as matt had said.  white fang had ceased eating, lost heart, and
allowed every dog of the team to thrash him.  in the cabin he lay on the
floor near the stove, without interest in food, in matt, nor in life.
matt might talk gently
 
 ___________________________
 
 to him or swear at him, it was all the same; he
never did more than turn his dull eyes upon the man, then drop his head
back to its customary position on his fore-paws.

and then, one night, matt, reading to himself with moving lips and
mumbled sounds, was startled by a low whine from white fang.  he had got
upon his feet, his ears cocked towards the door, and he was listening
intently.  a moment later, matt heard a footstep.  the door opened, and
weedon scott stepped in.  the two men shook hands.  then scott looked
around the room.

"where's the wolf?" he asked.

then he discovered him, standing where he had been lying, near to the
stove.  he had not rushed forward after the manner of other dogs.  he
stood, watching and waiting.

"holy smoke!" matt exclaimed.  "look at 'm wag his tail!"

weedon scott strode half across the room toward him, at the same time
calling him.  white fang came to him, not with a great bound, yet
quickly.  he was awakened fr
 
 ___________________________
 
om self-consciousness, but as he drew near,
his eyes took on a strange expression.  something, an incommunicable
vastness of feeling, rose up into his eyes as a light and shone forth.

"he never looked at me that way all the time you was gone!" matt
commented.

weedon scott did not hear.  he was squatting down on his heels, face to
face with white fang and petting him--rubbing at the roots of the ears,
making long caressing strokes down the neck to the shoulders, tapping the
spine gently with the balls of his fingers.  and white fang was growling
responsively, the crooning note of the growl more pronounced than ever.

but that was not all.  what of his joy, the great love in him, ever
surging and struggling to express itself, succeeded in finding a new
mode of exp
 
 ___________________________
 
 he lowered his crossed
arms, exposing the bestial face of beauty smith.  the dog-musher let go
of him precipitately, with action similar to that of a man who has picked
up live fire.  beauty smith blinked in the lamplight and looked about
him.  he caught sight of white fang and terror rushed into his face.

at the same moment matt noticed two objects lying in the snow.  he held
the lamp close to them, indicating them with his toe for his employer's
benefit--a steel dog-chain and a stout club.

weedon scott saw and nodded.  not a word was spoken.  the dog-musher laid
his hand on beauty smith's shoulder and faced him to the right about.  no
word needed to be spoken.  beauty smith started.

in the meantime the love-master was patting white fang and talking to
him.

"tried to steal you, eh?  and you wouldn't have it!  well, well, he made
a mistake, didn't he?"

"must 'a' thought he had hold of seventeen devils," the dog-musher
sniggered.

white fang, still wrought up and bristling, growled and growle
 
 ___________________________
 
oming calamity, even before
there was tangible evidence of it.  in vague ways it was borne in upon
him that a change was impending.  he knew not how nor why, yet he got his
feel of the oncoming event from the gods themselves.  in ways subtler
than they knew, they betrayed their intentions to the wolf-dog that
haunted the cabin-stoop, and that, though he never came inside the cabin,
knew what went on inside their brains.

"listen to that, will you!" the dog-musher exclaimed at supper one night.

weedon scott listened.  through the door came a low, anxious whine, like
a sobbing under the breath that had just grown audible.  then came the
long sniff, as white fang reassured himself that his god was still inside
and had not yet taken himself off in mysterious and solitary flight.

"i do believe that wolf's on to you," the dog-musher said.

weedon scott looked across at his companion with eyes that almost
pleaded, though this was given the lie by his words.

"what the devil can i do with a wolf in cali
 
 ___________________________
 
fornia?" he demanded.

"that's what i say," matt answered.  "what the devil can you do with a
wolf in california?"

but this did not satisfy weedon scott.  the other seemed to be judging
him in a non-committal sort of way.

"white man's dogs would have no show against him," scott went on.  "he'd
kill them on sight.  if he didn't bankrupt me with damage suits, the
authorities would take him away from me and electrocute him."

"he's a downright murderer, i know," was the dog-musher's comment.

weedon scott looked at him suspiciously.

"it would never do," he said decisively.

"it would never do!" matt concurred.  "why you'd have to hire a man
'specially to take care of 'm."

the other's suspicion was allayed.  he nodded cheerfully.  in the silence
that followed, the low, half-sobbing whine was heard at the door and then
the long, questing sniff.

"there's no denyin' he thinks a hell of a lot of you," matt said.

the other glared at him in sudden wrath.  "damn it all, man!  i know my
own mind and 
 
 ___________________________
 
what's best!"

"i'm agreein' with you, only . . . "

"only what?" scott snapped out.

"only . . . " the dog-musher began softly, then changed his mind and
betrayed a rising anger of his own.  "well, you needn't get so all-fired
het up about it.  judgin' by your actions one'd think you didn't know
your own mind."

weedon scott debated with himself for a while, and then said more gently:
"you are right, matt.  i don't know my own mind, and that's what's the
trouble."

"why, it would be rank ridiculousness for me to take that dog along," he
broke out after another pause.

"i'm agreein' with you," was matt's answer, and again his employer was
not quite satisfied with him.

"but how in the name of the great sardanapolis he knows you're goin' is
what gets me," the dog-musher continued innocently.

"it's beyond me, matt," 
 
 ___________________________
 
t taken him with him before, so, now, he could look to be left behind.

that night he lifted the long wolf-howl.  as he had howled, in his puppy
days, when he fled back from the wild to the village to find it vanished
and naught but a rubbish-heap to mark the site of grey beaver's tepee, so
now he pointed his muzzle to the cold stars and told to them his woe.

inside the cabin the two men had just gone to bed.

"he's gone off his food again," matt remarked from his bunk.

there was a grunt from weedon scott's bunk, and a stir of blankets.

"from the way he cut up the other time you went away, i wouldn't wonder
this time but what he died."

the blankets in the other bunk stirred irritably.

"oh, shut up!" scott cried out through the darkness.  "you nag worse than
a woman."

"i'm agreein' with you," the dog-musher answered, and weedon scott was
not quite sure whether or not the other had snickered.

the next day white fang's anxiety and restlessness were even more
pronounced.  he dogged his master's
 
 ___________________________
 
ld man, where you cannot
follow.  now give me a growl--the last, good, good-bye growl."

but white fang refused to growl.  instead, and after a wistful, searching
look, he snuggled in, burrowing his head out of sight between the
master's arm and body.

"there she blows!" matt cried.  from the yukon arose the hoarse bellowing
of a river steamboat.  "you've got to cut it short.  be sure and lock the
front door.  i'll go out the back.  get a move on!"

the two doors slammed at the same moment, and weedon scott waited for
matt to come around to the front.  from inside the door came a low
whining and sobbing.  then there were long, deep-drawn sniffs.

"you must take good care of him, matt," scott said, as they started down
the hill.  "write and let me know how he gets along."

"sure," the dog-musher answered.  "but listen to that, will you!"

both men stopped.  white fang was howling as dogs howl when their masters
lie dead.  he was voicing an utter woe, his cry bursting upward in great
heart-breaking 
 
 ___________________________
 
the dog-musher
muttered resentfully.  "and you--you ain't never fed 'm after them first
days of gettin' acquainted.  i'm blamed if i can see how he works it out
that you're the boss."

scott, who had been patting white fang, suddenly bent closer and pointed
out fresh-made cuts on his muzzle, and a gash between the eyes.

matt bent over and passed his hand along white fang's belly.

"we plumb forgot the window.  he's all cut an' gouged underneath.  must
'a' butted clean through it, b'gosh!"

but weedon scott was not listening.  he was thinking rapidly.  the
_aurora's_ whistle hooted a final announcement of departure.  men were
scurrying down the gang-plank to the shore.  matt loosened the bandana
from his own neck and started to put it around white fang's.  scott
grasped the dog-musher's hand.

"good-bye, matt, old man.  about the wolf--you needn't write.  you see,
i've . . . !"

"what!" the dog-musher exploded.  "you don't mean to say . . .?"

"the very thing i mean.  here's your bandana.  i'll wr
 
 ___________________________
 
ite to you about
him."

matt paused halfway down the gang-plank.

"he'll never stand the climate!" he shouted back.  "unless you clip 'm in
warm weather!"

the gang-plank was hauled in, and the _aurora_ swung out from the bank.
weedon scott waved a last good-bye.  then he turned and bent over white
fang, standing by his side.

"now growl, damn you, growl," he said, as he patted the responsive head
and rubbed the flattening ears.



chapter ii--the southland


white fang landed from the steamer in san francisco.  he was appalled.
deep in him, below any reasoning process or act of consciousness, he had
associated power with godhead.  and never had the white men seemed such
marvellous gods as now, when he trod the slimy pavement of s
 
 ___________________________
 
 hurling trunks
and boxes about, dragging them in through the door and tossing them into
the piles, or flinging them out of the door, smashing and crashing, to
other gods who awaited them.

and here, in this inferno of luggage, was white fang deserted by the
master.  or at least white fang thought he was deserted, until he smelled
out the master's canvas clothes-bags alongside of him, and proceeded to
mount guard over them.

"'bout time you come," growled the god of the car, an hour later, when
weedon scott appeared at the door.  "that dog of yourn won't let me lay a
finger on your stuff."

white fang emerged from the car.  he was astonished.  the nightmare city
was gone.  the car had been to him no more than a room in a house, and
when he had entered it the city had been all around him.  in the interval
the city had disappeared.  the roar of it no longer dinned upon his ears.
before him was smiling country, streaming with sunshine, lazy with
quietude.  but he had little time to marvel at the tran
 
 ___________________________
 
sformation.  he
accepted it as he accepted all the unaccountable doings and
manifestations of the gods.  it was their way.

there was a carriage waiting.  a man and a woman approached the master.
the woman's arms went out and clutched the master around the neck--a
hostile act!  the next moment weedon scott had torn loose from the
embrace and closed with white fang, who had become a snarling, raging
demon.

"it's all right, mother," scott was saying as he kept tight hold of white
fang and placated him.  "he thought you were going to injure me, and he
wouldn't stand for it.  it's all right.  it's all right.  he'll learn
soon enough."

"and in the meantime i may be permitted to love my son when his dog is
not around," she laughed, though she was pale and weak from the fright.

she looked at white fa
 
 ___________________________
 
estor of hers.  and so, as he abandoned his rush at her and braced
himself to avoid the contact, she sprang upon him.  he snarled
involuntarily as he felt her teeth in his shoulder, but beyond this made
no offer to hurt her.  he backed away, stiff-legged with
self-consciousness, and tried to go around her.  he dodged this way and
that, and curved and turned, but to no purpose.  she remained always
between him and the way he wanted to go.

"here, collie!" called the strange man in the carriage.

weedon scott laughed.

"never mind, father.  it is good discipline.  white fang will have to
learn many things, and it's just as well that he begins now.  he'll
adjust himself all right."

the carriage drove on, and still collie blocked white fang's way.  he
tried to outrun her by leaving the drive and circling across the lawn but
she ran on the inner and smaller circle, and was always there, facing him
with her two rows of gleaming teeth.  back he circled, across the drive
to the other lawn, and again she 
 
 ___________________________
 
n hour.  time and again the impulse surged over white
fang, and each time, as he yielded to it, he was checked by the master's
voice.  thus it was he learned the law, and ere he left the domain of the
chickens, he had learned to ignore their existence.

"you can never cure a chicken-killer."  judge scott shook his head sadly
at luncheon table, when his son narrated the lesson he had given white
fang.  "once they've got the habit and the taste of blood . . ."  again
he shook his head sadly.

but weedon scott did not agree with his father.  "i'll tell you what i'll
do," he challenged finally.  "i'll lock white fang in with the chickens
all afternoon."

"but think of the chickens," objected the judge.

"and furthermore," the son went on, "for every chicken he kills, i'll pay
you one dollar gold coin of the realm."

"but you should penalise father, too," interpose beth.

her sister seconded her, and a chorus of approval arose from around the
table.  judge scott nodded his head in agreement.

"all righ
 
 ___________________________
 
t." weedon scott pondered for a moment.  "and if, at the end of
the afternoon white fang hasn't harmed a chicken, for every ten minutes
of the time he has spent in the yard, you will have to say to him,
gravely and with deliberation, just as if you were sitting on the bench
and solemnly passing judgment, 'white fang, you are smarter than i
thought.'"

from hidden points of vantage the family watched the performance.  but it
was a fizzle.  locked in the yard and there deserted by the master, white
fang lay down 
 
 ___________________________
 
t almost as quickly as it had arisen, the commotion died away.  the
struggle had not lasted more than three minutes.  the frightened
household clustered at the top of the stairway.  from below, as from out
an abyss of blackness, came up a gurgling sound, as of air bubbling
through water.  sometimes this gurgle became sibilant, almost a whistle.
but this, too, quickly died down and ceased.  then naught came up out of
the blackness save a heavy panting of some creature struggling sorely for
air.

weedon scott pressed a button, and the staircase and downstairs hall were
flooded with light.  then he and judge scott, revolvers in hand,
cautiously descended.  there was no need for this caution.  white fang
had done his work.  in the midst of the wreckage of overthrown and
smashed furniture, partly on his side, his face hidden by an arm, lay a
man.  weedon scott bent over, removed the arm and turned the man's face
upward.  a gaping throat explained the manner of his death.

"jim hall," said judge scott, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and father and son looked significantly at
each other.

then they turned to white fang.  he, too, was lying on his side.  his
eyes were closed, but the lids slightly lifted in an effort to look at
them as they bent over him, and the tail was perceptibly agitated in a
vain effort to wag.  weedon scott patted him, and his throat rumbled an
acknowledging growl.  but it was a weak growl at best, and it quickly
ceased.  his eyelids drooped and went shut, and his whole body seemed to
relax and flatten out upon the floor.

"he's all in, poor devil," muttered the master.

"we'll see about that," asserted the judge, as he started for the
telephone.

"frankly, he has one chance in a thousand," announced the surgeon, after
he had worked an hour and a half on white fang.

dawn was breaking through the 