d gained the
inside he scouted carefully around, looking at it and finding it not.
then he lay down with a contented grunt at the master's feet, observing
all that went on, ever ready to spring to his feet and fight for life
with the terrors he felt must lurk under the trap-roof of the dwelling.



chapter iii--the god's domain


not only was white fang adaptable by nature, but he had travelled much,
and knew the meaning and necessity of adjustment.  here, in sierra vista,
which was the name of judge scott's place, white fang quickly began to
make himself at home.  he had no further serious trouble with the dogs.
they knew more about the ways of the southland gods than did he, and in
their eyes he had qualified when he accompanied the gods inside the
house.  wolf that he was, and unprecedented as it was, the gods had
sanctioned his presence, and they, the dogs of the gods, could only
recognise this sanction.

dick, perforce, had to go through a few stiff formalities at first, after
which he calml
 
 ___________________________
 
ated
affairs of sierra vista.  first of all, he had to learn the family of the
master.  in a way he was prepared to do this.  as mit-sah and kloo-kooch
had belonged to grey beaver, sharing his food, his fire, and his
blankets, so now, at sierra vista, belonged to the love-master all the
denizens of the house.

but in this matter there was a difference, and many differences.  sierra
vista was a far vaster affair than the tepee of grey beaver.  there were
many persons to be considered.  there was judge scott, and there was his
wife.  there were the master's two sisters, beth and mary.  there was his
wife, alice, and then there were his children, weedon and maud, toddlers
of four and six.  there was no way for anybody to tell him about all
these people, and of blood-ties and relationship he knew nothing whatever
and never would be capable of knowing.  yet he quickly worked it out that
all of them belonged to the master.  then, by observation, whenever
opportunity offered, by study of action, speech,
 
 ___________________________
 
rew even to like the children.  still he was not demonstrative.  he
would not go up to them.  on the other hand, instead of walking away at
sight of them, he waited for them to come to him.  and still later, it
was noticed that a pleased light came into his eyes when he saw them
approaching, and that he looked after them with an appearance of curious
regret when they left him for other amusements.

all this was a matter of development, and took time.  next in his regard,
after the children, was judge scott.  there were two reasons, possibly,
for this.  first, he was evidently a valuable possession of the master's,
and next, he was undemonstrative.  white fang liked to lie at his feet on
the wide porch when he read the newspaper, from time to time favouring
white fang with a look or a word--untroublesome tokens that he recognised
white fang's presence and existence.  but this was only when the master
was not around.  when the master appeared, all other beings ceased to
exist so far as white fang w
 
 ___________________________
 
impulse, when he saw the live food fluttering about
him and under his very nose, was to spring upon it.  he obeyed the
impulse, but was checked by the master's voice.  they continued in the
yards for half an hour.  time and again the impulse surged over white
fang, and each time, as he yielded to it, he was checked by the master's
voice.  thus it was he learned the law, and ere he left the domain of the
chickens, he had learned to ignore their existence.

"you can never cure a chicken-killer."  judge scott shook his head sadly
at luncheon table, when his son narrated the lesson he had given white
fang.  "once they've got the habit and the taste of blood . . ."  again
he shook his head sadly.

but weedon scott did not agree with his father.  "i'll tell you what i'll
do," he challenged finally.  "i'll lock white fang in with the chickens
all afternoon."

"but think of the chickens," objected the judge.

"and furthermore," the son went on, "for every chicken he kills, i'll pay
you one dollar gold co
 
 ___________________________
 
in of the realm."

"but you should penalise father, too," interpose beth.

her sister seconded her, and a chorus of approval arose from around the
table.  judge scott nodded his head in agreement.

"all right." weedon scott pondered for a moment.  "and if, at the end of
the afternoon white fang hasn't harmed a chicken, for every ten minutes
of the time he has spent in the yard, you will have to say to him,
gravely and with deliberation, just as if you were sitting on the bench
and solemnly passing judgment, 'white fang, you are smarter than i
thought.'"

from hidden points of vantage the family watched the performance.  but it
was a fizzle.  locked in the ya
 
 ___________________________
 
rd and there deserted by the master, white
fang lay down and went to sleep.  once he got up and walked over to the
trough for a drink of water.  the chickens he calmly ignored.  so far as
he was concerned they did not exist.  at four o'clock he executed a
running jump, gained the roof of the chicken-house and leaped to the
ground outside, whence he sauntered gravely to the house.  he had learned
the law.  and on the porch, before the delighted family, judge scott,
face to face with white fang, said slowly and solemnly, sixteen times,
"white fang, you are smarter than i thought."

but it was the multiplicity of laws that befuddled white fang and often
brought him into disgrace.  he had to learn that he must not touch the
chickens that belonged to other gods.  then there were cats, and rabbits,
and turkeys; all these he must let alone.  in fact, when he had but
partly learned the law, his impression was that he must leave all live
things alone.  out in th
 
 ___________________________
 
 they cornered him against a
rocking-chair and the railing.  he growled and tried to push by them.
their mother looked apprehensively in their direction.

"i confess, he makes me nervous around the children," she said.  "i have
a dread that he will turn upon them unexpectedly some day."

growling savagely, white fang sprang out of the corner, overturning the
boy and the girl.  the mother called them to her and comforted them,
telling them not to bother white fang.

"a wolf is a wolf!" commented judge scott.  "there is no trusting one."

"but he is not all wolf," interposed beth, standing for her brother in
his absence.

"you have only weedon's opinion for that," rejoined the judge.  "he
merely surmises that there is some strain of dog in white fang; but as he
will tell you himself, he knows nothing about it.  as for his
appearance--"

he did not finish his sentence.  white fang stood before him, growling
fiercely.

"go away!  lie down, sir!" judge scott commanded.

white fang turned to the love-m
 
 ___________________________
 
peech came to white fang, rushing up in a great burst of
barking.

"something has happened to weedon," his wife said decisively.

they were all on their feet now, and white fang ran down the steps,
looking back for them to follow.  for the second and last time in his
life he had barked and made himself understood.

after this event he found a warmer place in the hearts of the sierra
vista people, and even the groom whose arm he had slashed admitted that
he was a wise dog even if he was a wolf.  judge scott still held to the
same opinion, and proved it to everybody's dissatisfaction by
measurements and descriptions taken from the encyclopaedia and various
works on natural history.

the days came and went, streaming their unbroken sunshine over the santa
clara valley.  but as they grew shorter and white fang's second winter in
the southland came on, he made a strange discovery.  collie's teeth were
no longer sharp.  there was a playfulness about her nips and a gentleness
that prevented them from re
 
 ___________________________
 
 back to the towns, and their places filled
by men eager for the man-hunt.

and then jim hall disappeared.  the bloodhounds vainly quested on the
lost trail.  inoffensive ranchers in remote valleys were held up by armed
men and compelled to identify themselves.  while the remains of jim hall
were discovered on a dozen mountain-sides by greedy claimants for blood-
money.

in the meantime the newspapers were read at sierra vista, not so much
with interest as with anxiety.  the women were afraid.  judge scott pooh-
poohed and laughed, but not with reason, for it was in his last days on
the bench that jim hall had stood before him and received sentence.  and
in open court-room, before all men, jim hall had proclaimed that the day
would come when he would wreak vengeance on the judge that sentenced him.

for once, jim hall was right.  he was innocent of the crime for which he
was sentenced.  it was a case, in the parlance of thieves and police, of
"rail-roading."  jim hall was being "rail-roaded" to p
 
 ___________________________
 
rison for a crime
he had not committed.  because of the two prior convictions against him,
judge scott imposed upon him a sentence of fifty years.

judge scott did not know all things, and he did not know that he was
party to a police conspiracy, that the evidence was hatched and perjured,
that jim hall was guiltless of the crime charged.  and jim hall, on the
other hand, did not know that judge scott was merely ignorant.  jim hall
believed that the judge knew all about it and was hand in glove with the
police in the perpetration of the monstrous injustice.  so it was, when
the doom of fifty years of living death was uttered by judge scott, that
jim hall, hating all things in the society that misused him, rose up and
raged in the court-room until dragged down by half a dozen of his blue-
coated enemies.  to him, judge scott was the keystone in the arch of
injustice, and upon judge scott he e
 
 ___________________________
 
 minutes.  the frightened
household clustered at the top of the stairway.  from below, as from out
an abyss of blackness, came up a gurgling sound, as of air bubbling
through water.  sometimes this gurgle became sibilant, almost a whistle.
but this, too, quickly died down and ceased.  then naught came up out of
the blackness save a heavy panting of some creature struggling sorely for
air.

weedon scott pressed a button, and the staircase and downstairs hall were
flooded with light.  then he and judge scott, revolvers in hand,
cautiously descended.  there was no need for this caution.  white fang
had done his work.  in the midst of the wreckage of overthrown and
smashed furniture, partly on his side, his face hidden by an arm, lay a
man.  weedon scott bent over, removed the arm and turned the man's face
upward.  a gaping throat explained the manner of his death.

"jim hall," said judge scott, and father and son looked significantly at
each other.

then they turned to white fang.  he, too, was lyin
 
 ___________________________
 
d expense.  put him under the x-ray--anything.
weedon, telegraph at once to san francisco for doctor nichols.  no
reflection on you, doctor, you understand; but he must have the advantage
of every chance."

the surgeon smiled indulgently.  "of course i understand.  he deserves
all that can be done for him.  he must be nursed as you would nurse a
human being, a sick child.  and don't forget what i told you about
temperature.  i'll be back at ten o'clock again."

white fang received the nursing.  judge scott's suggestion of a trained
nurse was indignantly clamoured down by the girls, who themselves
undertook the task.  and white fang won out on the one chance in ten
thousand denied him by the surgeon.

the latter was not to be censured for his misjudgment.  all his life he
had tended and operated on the soft humans of civilisation, who lived
sheltered lives and had descended out of many sheltered generations.
compared with white fang, they were frail and flabby, and clutched life
without any streng
 
 ___________________________
 
m the blessed wolf.

he tried to rise to his feet, and after several attempts fell down from
weakness.  he had lain so long that his muscles had lost their cunning,
and all the strength had gone out of them.  he felt a little shame
because of his weakness, as though, forsooth, he were failing the gods in
the service he owed them.  because of this he made heroic efforts to
arise and at last he stood on his four legs, tottering and swaying back
and forth.

"the blessed wolf!" chorused the women.

judge scott surveyed them triumphantly.

"out of your own mouths be it," he said.  "just as i contended right
along.  no mere dog could have done what he did.  he's a wolf."

"a blessed wolf," amended the judge's wife.

"yes, blessed wolf," agreed the judge.  "and henceforth that shall be my
name for him."

"he'll have to learn to walk again," said the surgeon; "so he might as
well start in right now.  it won't hurt him.  take him outside."

and outside he went, like a king, with all sierra vista about him