ole tepee was in motion.
then the sharp cry of a squaw inside sent him scampering back to kiche.
but after that he was afraid no more of the looming bulks of the tepees.

a moment later he was straying away again from his mother.  her stick was
tied to a peg in the ground and she could not follow him.  a part-grown
puppy, somewhat larger and older than he, came toward him slowly, with
ostentatious and belligerent importance.  the puppy's name, as white fang
was afterward to hear him called, was lip-lip.  he had had experience in
puppy fights and was already something of a bully.

lip-lip was white fang's own kind, and, being only a puppy, did not seem
dangerous; so white fang prepared to meet him in a friendly spirit.  but
when the stranger's walk became stiff-legged and his lips lifted clear of
his teeth, white fang stiffened too, and answered with lifted lips.  they
half circled about each other, tentatively, snarling and bristling.  this
lasted several minutes, and white fang was beginning
 
 ___________________________
 
 to enjoy it, as a
sort of game.  but suddenly, with remarkable swiftness, lip-lip leaped
in, delivering a slashing snap, and leaped away again.  the snap had
taken effect on the shoulder that had been hurt by the lynx and that was
still sore deep down near the bone.  the surprise and hurt of it brought
a yelp out of white fang; but the next moment, in a rush of anger, he was
upon lip-lip and snapping viciously.

but lip-lip had lived his life in camp and had fought many puppy fights.
three times, four times, and half a dozen times, his sharp little teeth
scored on the newcomer, until white fang, yelping shamelessly, fled to
the protection of his mother.  it was the first of the many fights he was
to have with lip-lip, for they were enemies from the start, born so, with
natures destined perpetually to clash.

kiche licked white fang soothingly with her tongue, and tried to prevail
upon him to remain with her.  but 
 
 ___________________________
 

and greediness of the older dogs when meat or fish was thrown out to be
eaten.  he came to know that men were more just, children more cruel, and
women more kindly and more likely to toss him a bit of meat or bone.  and
after two or three painful adventures with the mothers of part-grown
puppies, he came into the knowledge that it was always good policy to let
such mothers alone, to keep away from them as far as possible, and to
avoid them when he saw them coming.

but the bane of his life was lip-lip.  larger, older, and stronger, lip-
lip had selected white fang for his special object of persecution.  while
fang fought willingly enough, but he was outclassed.  his enemy was too
big.  lip-lip became a nightmare to him.  whenever he ventured away from
his mother, the bully was sure to appear, trailing at his heels, snarling
at him, picking upon him, and watchful of an opportunity, when no man-
animal was near, to spring upon him and force a fight.  as lip-lip
invariably won, he enjoyed it hu
 
 ___________________________
 
n
life, as it became white fang's chief torment.

but the effect upon white fang was not to cow him.  though he suffered
most of the damage and was always defeated, his spirit remained
unsubdued.  yet a bad effect was produced.  he became malignant and
morose.  his temper had been savage by birth, but it became more savage
under this unending persecution.  the genial, playful, puppyish side of
him found little expression.  he never played and gambolled about with
the other puppies of the camp.  lip-lip would not permit it.  the moment
white fang appeared near them, lip-lip was upon him, bullying and
hectoring him, or fighting with him until he had driven him away.

the effect of all this was to rob white fang of much of his puppyhood and
to make him in his comportment older than his age.  denied the outlet,
through play, of his energies, he recoiled upon himself and developed his
mental processes.  he became cunning; he had idle time in which to devote
himself to thoughts of trickery.  preven
 
 ___________________________
 
he learned to
sneak about camp, to be crafty, to know what was going on everywhere, to
see and to hear everything and to reason accordingly, and successfully to
devise ways and means of avoiding his implacable persecutor.

it was early in the days of his persecution that he played his first
really big crafty game and got therefrom his first taste of revenge.  as
kiche, when with the wolves, had lured out to destruction dogs from the
camps of men, so white fang, in manner somewhat similar, lured lip-lip
into kiche's avenging jaws.  retreating before lip-lip, white fang made
an indirect flight that led in and out and around the various tepees of
the camp.  he was a good runner, swifter than any puppy of his size, and
swifter than lip-lip.  but he did not run his best in this chase.  he
barely held his own, one leap ahead of his pursuer.

lip-lip, excited by the chase and by the persistent nearness of his
victim, forgot caution and locality.  when he remembered locality, it was
too late.  dashin
 
 ___________________________
 
o that he
could not run, while she repeatedly ripped and slashed him with her
fangs.

when at last he succeeded in rolling clear of her, he crawled to his
feet, badly dishevelled, hurt both in body and in spirit.  his hair was
standing out all over him in tufts where her teeth had mauled.  he stood
where he had arisen, opened his mouth, and broke out the long,
heart-broken puppy wail.  but even this he was not allowed to complete.
in the middle of it, white fang, rushing in, sank his teeth into
lip-lip's hind leg.  there was no fight left in lip-lip, and he ran away
shamelessly, his victim hot on his heels and worrying him all the way
back to his own tepee.  here the squaws came to his aid, and white fang,
transformed into a raging demon, was finally driven off only by a
fusillade of stones.

came the day when grey beaver, deciding that the liability of her running
away was past, released kiche.  white fang was delighted with his
mother's freedom.  he accompanied her joyfully about the camp; 
 
 ___________________________
 
and, so
long as he remained close by her side, lip-lip kept a respectful
distance.  white fang even bristled up to him and walked stiff-legged,
but lip-lip ignored the challenge.  he was no fool himself, and whatever
vengeance he desired to wreak, he could wait until he caught white fang
alone.

later on that day, kiche and white fang strayed into the edge of the
woods next to the camp.  he had led his mother there, step by step, and
now when she stopped, he tried to inveigle her farther.  the stream, the
lair, and the quiet woods were calling to him, and he wanted her to come.
he ran on a few steps, stopped, and looked back.  she had not moved.  
 
 ___________________________
 
him; the body of the lord and master was sacred, not to be defiled by the
teeth of such as he.  that was evidently the crime of crimes, the one
offence there was no condoning nor overlooking.

when the canoe touched the shore, white fang lay whimpering and
motionless, waiting the will of grey beaver.  it was grey beaver's will
that he should go ashore, for ashore he was flung, striking heavily on
his side and hurting his bruises afresh.  he crawled tremblingly to his
feet and stood whimpering.  lip-lip, who had watched the whole proceeding
from the bank, now rushed upon him, knocking him over and sinking his
teeth into him.  white fang was too helpless to defend himself, and it
would have gone hard with him had not grey beaver's foot shot out,
lifting lip-lip into the air with its violence so that he smashed down to
earth a dozen feet away.  this was the man-animal's justice; and even
then, in his own pitiable plight, white fang experienced a little
grateful thrill.  at grey beaver's heels he
 
 ___________________________
 
's bondage being
riveted upon him.  the qualities in his kind that in the beginning made
it possible for them to come in to the fires of men, were qualities
capable of development.  they were developing in him, and the camp-life,
replete with misery as it was, was secretly endearing itself to him all
the time.  but white fang was unaware of it.  he knew only grief for the
loss of kiche, hope for her return, and a hungry yearning for the free
life that had been his.



chapter iii--the outcast


lip-lip continued so to darken his days that white fang became wickeder
and more ferocious than it was his natural right to be.  savageness was a
part of his make-up, but the savageness thus developed exceeded his make-
up.  he acquired a reputation for wickedness amongst the man-animals
themselves.  wherever there was trouble and uproar in camp, fighting and
squabbling or the outcry of a squaw over a bit of stolen meat, they were
sure to find white fang mixed up in it and usually at the bottom of it.

 
 ___________________________
 
they did not bother to look after the causes of his conduct.  they saw
only the effects, and the effects were bad.  he was a sneak and a thief,
a mischief-maker, a fomenter of trouble; and irate squaws told him to his
face, the while he eyed them alert and ready to dodge any quick-flung
missile, that he was a wolf and worthless and bound to come to an evil
end.

he found himself an outcast in the midst of the populous camp.  all the
young dogs followed lip-lip's lead.  there was a difference between white
fang and them.  perhaps they sensed his wild-wood breed, and
instinctively felt for him the enmity that the domestic dog feels for the
wolf.  but be that as it may, they joined with lip-lip in the
persecution.  and, once declared against him, they found good reason to
continue declared against him.  one and all, from time to time, they felt
his teeth; and to his credit, he gave more than he received.  many of
them he could whip in single fight; but 
 
 ___________________________
 
fang's snarl enabled him to beat an honourable
retreat.

an outcast himself from the pack of the part-grown dogs, his sanguinary
methods and remarkable efficiency made the pack pay for its persecution
of him.  not permitted himself to run with the pack, the curious state of
affairs obtained that no member of the pack could run outside the pack.
white fang would not permit it.  what of his bushwhacking and waylaying
tactics, the young dogs were afraid to run by themselves.  with the
exception of lip-lip, they were compelled to hunch together for mutual
protection against the terrible enemy they had made.  a puppy alone by
the river bank meant a puppy dead or a puppy that aroused the camp with
its shrill pain and terror as it fled back from the wolf-cub that had
waylaid it.

but white fang's reprisals did not cease, even when the young dogs had
learned thoroughly that they must stay together.  he attacked them when
he caught them alone, and they attacked him when they were bunched.  the
sight o
 
 ___________________________
 
here were no
shadows nor darknesses.  but no village greeted his eyes.  he had
forgotten.  the village had gone away.

his wild flight ceased abruptly.  there was no place to which to flee.  he
slunk forlornly through the deserted camp, smelling the rubbish-heaps and
the discarded rags and tags of the gods.  he would have been glad for the
rattle of stones about him, flung by an angry squaw, glad for the hand of
grey beaver descending upon him in wrath; while he would have welcomed
with delight lip-lip and the whole snarling, cowardly pack.

he came to where grey beaver's tepee had stood.  in the centre of the
space it had occupied, he sat down.  he pointed his nose at the moon.  his
throat was afflicted by rigid spasms, his mouth opened, and in a heart-
broken cry bubbled up his loneliness and fear, his grief for kiche, all
his past sorrows and miseries as well as his apprehension of sufferings
and dangers to come.  it was the long wolf-howl, full-throated and
mournful, the first howl he had
 
 ___________________________
 
in front of him must pull the sled
faster, and that the faster the sled travelled, the faster could the dog
attacked run away.  thus, the dog behind could never catch up with the
one in front.  the faster he ran, the faster ran the one he was after,
and the faster ran all the dogs.  incidentally, the sled went faster, and
thus, by cunning indirection, did man increase his mastery over the
beasts.

mit-sah resembled his father, much of whose grey wisdom he possessed.  in
the past he had observed lip-lip's persecution of white fang; but at that
time lip-lip was another man's dog, and mit-sah had never dared more than
to shy an occasional stone at him.  but now lip-lip was his dog, and he
proceeded to wreak his vengeance on him by putting him at the end of the
longest rope.  this made lip-lip the leader, and was apparently an
honour! but in reality it took away from him all honour, and instead of
being bully and master of the pack, he now found himself hated and
persecuted by the pack.

because 
 
 ___________________________
 
he ran at the end of the longest rope, the dogs had always the
view of him running away before them.  all that they saw of him was his
bushy tail and fleeing hind legs--a view far less ferocious and
intimidating than his bristling mane and gleaming fangs.  also, dogs
being so constituted in their mental ways, the sight of him running away
gave desire to run after him and a feeling that he ran away from them.

the moment the sled started, the team took after lip-lip in a chase that
extended throughout the day.  at first he had been prone to turn upon his
pursuers, jealous of his dignity and wrathful; but at such times mit-sah
would throw the stinging lash of the thirty-foot cariboo-gut whip into
his face and compel him to turn tail and run on.  lip-lip might face the
pack, but he could not face that whip, and all that was left him to do
was to keep his long rope taut and his flanks ahead of the teeth of his
mates.

but a still greater cunning lurked in the
 
 ___________________________
 
 recesses of the indian mind.  to
give point to unending pursuit of the leader, mit-sah favoured him over
the other dogs.  these favours aroused in them jealousy and hatred.  in
their presence mit-sah would give him meat and would give it to him only.
this was maddening to them.  they would rage around just outside the
throwing-distance of the whip, while lip-lip devoured the meat and mit-
sah protected him.  and when there was no meat to give, mit-sah would
keep the team at a distance and make believe to give meat to lip-lip.

white fang took kindly to the work.  he had travelled a greater distance
than the other dogs in the yielding of himself to the rule of the gods,
and he had learned more thoroughly the futility of opposing their will.
in addition, the persecution he had suffered from the pack had made the
pack less to him in the scheme of things, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ent.
faithfulness and willingness characterised his toil.  these are essential
traits of the wolf and the wild-dog when they have become domesticated,
and these traits white fang possessed in unusual measure.

a companionship did exist between white fang and the other dogs, but it
was one of warfare and enmity.  he had never learned to play with them.
he knew only how to fight, and fight with them he did, returning to them
a hundred-fold the snaps and slashes they had given him in the days when
lip-lip was leader of the pack.  but lip-lip was no longer leader--except
when he fled away before his mates at the end of his rope, the sled
bounding along behind.  in camp he kept close to mit-sah or grey beaver
or kloo-kooch.  he did not dare venture away from the gods, for now the
fangs of all dogs were against him, and he tasted to the dregs the
persecution that had been white fang's.

with the overthrow of lip-lip, white fang could have become leader of the
pack.  but he was too morose and solita
 
 ___________________________
 
e covenant were such that if ever he met kiche again he would
not desert his god to go with her.  his allegiance to man seemed somehow
a law of his being greater than the love of liberty, of kind and kin.



chapter vi--the famine


the spring of the year was at hand when grey beaver finished his long
journey.  it was april, and white fang was a year old when he pulled into
the home villages and was loosed from the harness by mit-sah.  though a
long way from his full growth, white fang, next to lip-lip, was the
largest yearling in the village.  both from his father, the wolf, and
from kiche, he had inherited stature and strength, and already he was
measuring up alongside the full-grown dogs.  but he had not yet grown
compact.  his body was slender and rangy, and his strength more stringy
than massive. his coat was the true wolf-grey, and to all appearances he
was true wolf himself.  the quarter-strain of dog he had inherited from
kiche had left no mark on him physically, though it had played 
 
 ___________________________
 
 life had little
chance in such a famine.

kiche's greeting of her grown son was anything but affectionate.  but
white fang did not mind.  he had outgrown his mother.  so he turned tail
philosophically and trotted on up the stream.  at the forks he took the
turning to the left, where he found the lair of the lynx with whom his
mother and he had fought long before.  here, in the abandoned lair, he
settled down and rested for a day.

during the early summer, in the last days of the famine, he met lip-lip,
who had likewise taken to the woods, where he had eked out a miserable
existence.

white fang came upon him unexpectedly.  trotting in opposite directions
along the base of a high bluff, they rounded a corner of rock and found
themselves face to face.  they paused with instant alarm, and looked at
each other suspiciously.

white fang was in splendid condition.  his hunting had been good, and for
a week he had eaten his fill.  he was even gorged from his latest kill.
but in the moment he looked
 
 ___________________________
 
 at lip-lip his hair rose on end all along his
back.  it was an involuntary bristling on his part, the physical state
that in the past had always accompanied the mental state produced in him
by lip-lip's bullying and persecution.  as in the past he had bristled
and snarled at sight of lip-lip, so now, and automatically, he bristled
and snarled.  he did not waste any time.  the thing was done thoroughly
and with despatch.  lip-lip essayed to back away, but white fang struck
him hard, shoulder to shoulder.  lip-lip was overthrown and rolled upon
his back.  white fang's teeth drove into the scrawny throat.  there was a
death-struggle, during which white fang walked around, stiff-legged and
observant.  then he resumed his course and trotted on along the base of
the bluff.

one day, not long after, he came to the edge of the forest, where a
narrow stretch of open land sloped down to the mackenzie.  he had been
over this grou
 
 ___________________________
 
ered the ancient feud.

all of which served to make white fang's days enjoyable.  if the sight of
him drove these strange dogs upon him, so much the better for him, so
much the worse for them.  they looked upon him as legitimate prey, and as
legitimate prey he looked upon them.

not for nothing had he first seen the light of day in a lonely lair and
fought his first fights with the ptarmigan, the weasel, and the lynx.  and
not for nothing had his puppyhood been made bitter by the persecution of
lip-lip and the whole puppy pack.  it might have been otherwise, and he
would then have been otherwise.  had lip-lip not existed, he would have
passed his puppyhood with the other puppies and grown up more doglike and
with more liking for dogs.  had grey beaver possessed the plummet of
affection and love, he might have sounded the deeps of white fang's
nature and brought up to the surface all manner of kindly qualities.  but
these things had not been so.  the clay of white fang had been moulded
until h
 
 ___________________________
 
o as to avoid interference from the mounted
police of the territory.  after a few hours of waiting, when daylight had
come, the audience and the dog with which he was to fight arrived.  in
this manner it came about that he fought all sizes and breeds of dogs.  it
was a savage land, the men were savage, and the fights were usually to
the death.

since white fang continued to fight, it is obvious that it was the other
dogs that died.  he never knew defeat.  his early training, when he
fought with lip-lip and the whole puppy-pack, stood him in good stead.
there was the tenacity with which he clung to the earth.  no dog could
make him lose his footing.  this was the favourite trick of the wolf
breeds--to rush in upon him, either directly or with an unexpected
swerve, in the hope of striking his shoulder and overthrowing him.
mackenzie hounds, eskimo and labrador dogs, huskies and malemutes--all
tried it on him, and all failed.  he was never known to lose his footing.
men told this to one another,
 
 ___________________________
 
good soil.

and yet he remained somehow different from other dogs.  he knew the law
even better than did the dogs that had known no other life, and he
observed the law more punctiliously; but still there was about him a
suggestion of lurking ferocity, as though the wild still lingered in him
and the wolf in him merely slept.

he never chummed with other dogs.  lonely he had lived, so far as his
kind was concerned, and lonely he would continue to live.  in his
puppyhood, under the persecution of lip-lip and the puppy-pack, and in
his fighting days with beauty smith, he had acquired a fixed aversion for
dogs.  the natural course of his life had been diverted, and, recoiling
from his kind, he had clung to the human.

besides, all southland dogs looked upon him with suspicion.  he aroused
in them their instinctive fear of the wild, and they greeted him always
with snarl and growl and belligerent hatred.  he, on the other hand,
learned that it was not necessary to use his teeth upon them.  his nak
 
 ___________________________
 
im, in spirit and in flesh, with the tenacity that
of old belonged to all creatures.

bound down a prisoner, denied even movement by the plaster casts and
bandages, white fang lingered out the weeks.  he slept long hours and
dreamed much, and through his mind passed an unending pageant of
northland visions.  all the ghosts of the past arose and were with him.
once again he lived in the lair with kiche, crept trembling to the knees
of grey beaver to tender his allegiance, ran for his life before lip-lip
and all the howling bedlam of the puppy-pack.

he ran again through the silence, hunting his living food through the
months of famine; and again he ran at the head of the team, the gut-whips
of mit-sah and grey beaver snapping behind, their voices crying "ra!
raa!" when they came to a narrow passage and the team closed together
like a fan to go through.  he lived again all his days with beauty smith
and the fights he had fought.  at such times he whimpered and snarled in
his sleep, and they tha