 a pretty sight.  but to the cub the spectacle of her
protective rage was pleasing.  he uttered a glad little cry and bounded
to meet her, while the man-animals went back hastily several steps.  the
she-wolf stood over against her cub, facing the men, with bristling hair,
a snarl rumbling deep in her throat.  her face was distorted and
malignant with menace, even the bridge of the nose wrinkling from tip to
eyes so prodigious was her snarl.

then it was that a cry went up from one of the men.  "kiche!" was what he
uttered.  it was an exclamation of surprise.  the cub felt his mother
wilting at the sound.

"kiche!" the man cried again, this time with sharpness and authority.

and then the cub saw his mother, the she-wolf, the fearless one,
crouching down till her belly touched the ground, whimpering, wagging her
tail, making peace signs.  the cub could not understand.  he was
appalled.  the awe of man rushed over him again.  his instinct had been
true.  his mother verified it.  she, too, ren
 
 ___________________________
 
d her,
which actions she made no attempt to resent.  they were greatly excited,
and made many noises with their mouths.  these noises were not indication
of danger, the cub decided, as he crouched near his mother still
bristling from time to time but doing his best to submit.

"it is not strange," an indian was saying.  "her father was a wolf.  it
is true, her mother was a dog; but did not my brother tie her out in the
woods all of three nights in the mating season?  therefore was the father
of kiche a wolf."

"it is a year, grey beaver, since she ran away," spoke a second indian.

"it is not strange, salmon tongue," grey beaver answered.  "it was the
time of the famine, and there was no meat for the dogs."

"she has lived with the wolves," said a third indian.

"so it would seem, three eagles," grey beaver answered, laying his hand
on the cub; "and this be the sign of it."

the cub snarled a little at the touch of the hand, and the hand flew back
to administer a clout.  whereupon the cub c
 
 ___________________________
 
overed its fangs, and sank
down submissively, while the hand, returning, rubbed behind his ears, and
up and down his back.

"this be the sign of it," grey beaver went on.  "it is plain that his
mother is kiche.  but his father was a wolf.  wherefore is there in him
little dog and much wolf.  his fangs be white, and white fang shall be
his name.  i have spoken.  he is my dog.  for was not kiche my brother's
dog?  and is not my brother dead?"

the cub, who had thus received a name in the world, lay and watched.  for
a time the man-animals continued to make their mouth-noises.  then grey
beaver took a knife from a sheath that hung around his neck, and went
into the thicket and cut a stick.  white fang watched him.  he notched
the stick at each end and in the notches fastened strings of raw-hide.
one string he tied around the throat of kiche.  then he led her to a
small pine, around whic
 
 ___________________________
 
h he tied the other string.

white fang followed and lay down beside her.  salmon tongue's hand
reached out to him and rolled him over on his back.  kiche looked on
anxiously.  white fang felt fear mounting in him again.  he could not
quite suppress a snarl, but he made no offer to snap.  the hand, with
fingers crooked and spread apart, rubbed his stomach in a playful way and
rolled him from side to side.  it was ridiculous and ungainly, lying
there on his back with legs sprawling in the air.  besides, it was a
position of such utter helplessness that white fang's whole nature
revolted against it.  he could do nothing to defend himself.  if this 
 
 ___________________________
 
s before, but at sight of them he felt that
they were his own kind, only somehow different.  but they displayed
little difference from the wolf when they discovered the cub and his
mother.  there was a rush.  white fang bristled and snarled and snapped
in the face of the open-mouthed oncoming wave of dogs, and went down and
under them, feeling the sharp slash of teeth in his body, himself biting
and tearing at the legs and bellies above him.  there was a great uproar.
he could hear the snarl of kiche as she fought for him; and he could hear
the cries of the man-animals, the sound of clubs striking upon bodies,
and the yelps of pain from the dogs so struck.

only a few seconds elapsed before he was on his feet again.  he could now
see the man-animals driving back the dogs with clubs and stones,
defending him, saving him from the savage teeth of his kind that somehow
was not his kind.  and though there was no reason in his brain for a
clear conception of so abstract a thing as justice, nevert
 
 ___________________________
 
 yet of the trap and of bondage he knew
nothing.  freedom to roam and run and lie down at will, had been his
heritage; and here it was being infringed upon.  his mother's movements
were restricted to the length of a stick, and by the length of that same
stick was he restricted, for he had not yet got beyond the need of his
mother's side.

he did not like it.  nor did he like it when the man-animals arose and
went on with their march; for a tiny man-animal took the other end of the
stick and led kiche captive behind him, and behind kiche followed white
fang, greatly perturbed and worried by this new adventure he had entered
upon.

they went down the valley of the stream, far beyond white fang's widest
ranging, until they came to the end of the valley, where the stream ran
into the mackenzie river.  here, where canoes were cached on poles high
in the air and where stood fish-racks for the drying of fish, camp was
made; and white fang looked on with wondering eyes.  the superiority of
these ma
 
 ___________________________
 
f them.  they loomed ominously above him; and when the breeze
stirred them into huge movements, he cowered down in fear, keeping his
eyes warily upon them, and prepared to spring away if they attempted to
precipitate themselves upon him.

but in a short while his fear of the tepees passed away.  he saw the
women and children passing in and out of them without harm, and he saw
the dogs trying often to get into them, and being driven away with sharp
words and flying stones.  after a time, he left kiche's side and crawled
cautiously toward the wall of the nearest tepee.  it was the curiosity of
growth that urged him on--the necessity of learning and living and doing
that brings experience.  the last few inches to the wall of the tepee
were crawled with painful slowness and precaution.  the day's events had
prepared him for the unknown to manifest itself in most stupendous and
unthinkable ways.  at last his nose touched the canvas.  he waited.
nothing happened.  then he smelled the strange fabr
 
 ___________________________
 
ic, saturated with the
man-smell.  he closed on the canvas with his teeth and gave a gentle tug.
nothing happened, though the adjacent portions of the tepee moved.  he
tugged harder.  there was a greater movement.  it was delightful.  he
tugged still harder, and repeatedly, until the whole tepee was in motion.
then the sharp cry of a squaw inside sent him scampering back to kiche.
but after that he was afraid no more of the looming bulks of the tepees.

a moment later he was straying away again from his mother.  her stick was
tied to a peg in the ground and she could not follow him.  a part-grown
puppy, somewhat larger and older than he, came toward him slowly, with
ostentatious and belligerent importance.  the puppy's name, as white fang
was afterward to hear him called, was lip-lip.  he had had experience in
puppy fights and was already something of a bully.

lip-lip 
 
 ___________________________
 
ite fang; but the next moment, in a rush of anger, he was
upon lip-lip and snapping viciously.

but lip-lip had lived his life in camp and had fought many puppy fights.
three times, four times, and half a dozen times, his sharp little teeth
scored on the newcomer, until white fang, yelping shamelessly, fled to
the protection of his mother.  it was the first of the many fights he was
to have with lip-lip, for they were enemies from the start, born so, with
natures destined perpetually to clash.

kiche licked white fang soothingly with her tongue, and tried to prevail
upon him to remain with her.  but his curiosity was rampant, and several
minutes later he was venturing forth on a new quest.  he came upon one of
the man-animals, grey beaver, who was squatting on his hams and doing
something with sticks and dry moss spread before him on the ground.  white
fang came near to him and watched.  grey beaver made mouth-noises which
white fang interpreted as not hostile, so he came still nearer.

wom
 
 ___________________________
 
e
mouth of the cave had drawn him in his early puppyhood.  he crawled the
several steps toward the flame.  he heard grey beaver chuckle above him,
and he knew the sound was not hostile.  then his nose touched the flame,
and at the same instant his little tongue went out to it.

for a moment he was paralysed.  the unknown, lurking in the midst of the
sticks and moss, was savagely clutching him by the nose.  he scrambled
backward, bursting out in an astonished explosion of ki-yi's.  at the
sound, kiche leaped snarling to the end of her stick, and there raged
terribly because she could not come to his aid.  but grey beaver laughed
loudly, and slapped his thighs, and told the happening to all the rest of
the camp, till everybody was laughing uproariously.  but white fang sat
on his haunches and ki-yi'd and ki-yi'd, a forlorn and pitiable little
figure in the midst of the man-animals.

it was the worst hurt he had ever known.  both nose and tongue had been
scorched by the live thing, sun-coloure
 
 ___________________________
 
; whereupon he
cried more hopelessly and helplessly than ever.

and then shame came to him.  he knew laughter and the meaning of it.  it
is not given us to know how some animals know laughter, and know when
they are being laughed at; but it was this same way that white fang knew
it.  and he felt shame that the man-animals should be laughing at him.  he
turned and fled away, not from the hurt of the fire, but from the
laughter that sank even deeper, and hurt in the spirit of him.  and he
fled to kiche, raging at the end of her stick like an animal gone mad--to
kiche, the one creature in the world who was not laughing at him.

twilight drew down and night came on, and white fang lay by his mother's
side.  his nose and tongue still hurt, but he was perplexed by a greater
trouble.  he was homesick.  he felt a vacancy in him, a need for the hush
and quietude of the stream and the cave in the cliff.  life had become
too populous.  there were so many of the man-animals, men, women, and
children, a
 
 ___________________________
 
hension they were as much
wonder-workers as gods are to men.  they were creatures of mastery,
possessing all manner of unknown and impossible potencies, overlords of
the alive and the not alive--making obey that which moved, imparting
movement to that which did not move, and making life, sun-coloured and
biting life, to grow out of dead moss and wood.  they were fire-makers!
they were gods.



chapter ii--the bondage


the days were thronged with experience for white fang.  during the time
that kiche was tied by the stick, he ran about over all the camp,
inquiring, investigating, learning.  he quickly came to know much of the
ways of the man-animals, but familiarity did not breed contempt.  the
more he came to know them, the more they vindicated their superiority,
the more they displayed their mysterious powers, the greater loomed their
god-likeness.

to man has been given the grief, often, of seeing his gods overthrown and
his altars crumbling; but to the wolf and the wild dog that have co
 
 ___________________________
 
o effort of faith is necessary to believe in such a
god; no effort of will can possibly induce disbelief in such a god.  there
is no getting away from it.  there it stands, on its two hind-legs, club
in hand, immensely potential, passionate and wrathful and loving, god and
mystery and power all wrapped up and around by flesh that bleeds when it
is torn and that is good to eat like any flesh.

and so it was with white fang.  the man-animals were gods unmistakable
and unescapable.  as his mother, kiche, had rendered her allegiance to
them at the first cry of her name, so he was beginning to render his
allegiance.  he gave them the trail as a privilege indubitably theirs.
when they walked, he got out of their way.  when they called, he came.
when they threatened, he cowered down.  when they commanded him to go, he
went away hurriedly.  for behind any wish of theirs was power to enforce
that wish, power that hurt, power that expressed itself in clouts and
clubs, in flying stones and stinging la
 
 ___________________________
 
existence.  this in itself was compensation, for it is always easier to
lean upon another than to stand alone.

but it did not all happen in a day, this giving over of himself, body and
soul, to the man-animals.  he could not immediately forego his wild
heritage and his memories of the wild.  there were days when he crept to
the edge of the forest and stood and listened to something calling him
far and away.  and always he returned, restless and uncomfortable, to
whimper softly and wistfully at kiche's side and to lick her face with
eager, questioning tongue.

white fang learned rapidly the ways of the camp.  he knew the injustice
and greediness of the older dogs when meat or fish was thrown out to be
eaten.  he came to know that men were more just, children more cruel, and
women more kindly and more likely to toss him a bit of meat or bone.  and
after two or three painful adventures with the mothers of part-grown
puppies, he came into the knowledge that it was always good policy to let
suc
 
 ___________________________
 
me a
clever thief.  he had to forage for himself, and he foraged well, though
he was oft-times a plague to the squaws in consequence.  he learned to
sneak about camp, to be crafty, to know what was going on everywhere, to
see and to hear everything and to reason accordingly, and successfully to
devise ways and means of avoiding his implacable persecutor.

it was early in the days of his persecution that he played his first
really big crafty game and got therefrom his first taste of revenge.  as
kiche, when with the wolves, had lured out to destruction dogs from the
camps of men, so white fang, in manner somewhat similar, lured lip-lip
into kiche's avenging jaws.  retreating before lip-lip, white fang made
an indirect flight that led in and out and around the various tepees of
the camp.  he was a good runner, swifter than any puppy of his size, and
swifter than lip-lip.  but he did not run his best in this chase.  he
barely held his own, one leap ahead of his pursuer.

lip-lip, excited by th
 
 ___________________________
 
e chase and by the persistent nearness of his
victim, forgot caution and locality.  when he remembered locality, it was
too late.  dashing at top speed around a tepee, he ran full tilt into
kiche lying at the end of her stick.  he gave one yelp of consternation,
and then her punishing jaws closed upon him.  she was tied, but he could
not get away from her easily.  she rolled him off his legs so that he
could not run, while she repeatedly ripped and slashed him with her
fangs.

when at last he succeeded in rolling clear of her, he crawled to his
feet, badly dishevelled, hurt both in body and in spirit.  his hair was
standing out all over him in tufts where her teeth had mauled.  he stood
 
 ___________________________
 
 he was not allowed to complete.
in the middle of it, white fang, rushing in, sank his teeth into
lip-lip's hind leg.  there was no fight left in lip-lip, and he ran away
shamelessly, his victim hot on his heels and worrying him all the way
back to his own tepee.  here the squaws came to his aid, and white fang,
transformed into a raging demon, was finally driven off only by a
fusillade of stones.

came the day when grey beaver, deciding that the liability of her running
away was past, released kiche.  white fang was delighted with his
mother's freedom.  he accompanied her joyfully about the camp; and, so
long as he remained close by her side, lip-lip kept a respectful
distance.  white fang even bristled up to him and walked stiff-legged,
but lip-lip ignored the challenge.  he was no fool himself, and whatever
vengeance he desired to wreak, he could wait until he caught white fang
alone.

later on that day, kiche and white fang strayed into the edge of the
woods next to the camp.  he had le
 
 ___________________________
 
ran on again.  and still she did
not move.  he stopped and regarded her, all of an intentness and
eagerness, physically expressed, that slowly faded out of him as she
turned her head and gazed back at the camp.

there was something calling to him out there in the open.  his mother
heard it too.  but she heard also that other and louder call, the call of
the fire and of man--the call which has been given alone of all animals
to the wolf to answer, to the wolf and the wild-dog, who are brothers.

kiche turned and slowly trotted back toward camp.  stronger than the
physical restraint of the stick was the clutch of the camp upon her.
unseen and occultly, the gods still gripped with their power and would
not let her go.  white fang sat down in the shadow of a birch and
whimpered softly.  there was a strong smell of pine, and subtle wood
fragrances filled the air, reminding him of his old life of freedom
before the days of his bondage.  but he was still only a part-grown
puppy, and stronger than 
 
 ___________________________
 
se and trotted
forlornly back to camp, pausing once, and twice, to sit down and whimper
and to listen to the call that still sounded in the depths of the forest.

in the wild the time of a mother with her young is short; but under the
dominion of man it is sometimes even shorter.  thus it was with white
fang.  grey beaver was in the debt of three eagles.  three eagles was
going away on a trip up the mackenzie to the great slave lake.  a strip
of scarlet cloth, a bearskin, twenty cartridges, and kiche, went to pay
the debt.  white fang saw his mother taken aboard three eagles' canoe,
and tried to follow her.  a blow from three eagles knocked him backward
to the land.  the canoe shoved off.  he sprang into the water and swam
after it, deaf to the sharp cries of grey beaver to return.  even a man-
animal, a god, white fang ignored, such was the terror he was in of
losing his mother.

but gods are accustomed to being obeyed, and grey beaver wrathfully
launched a canoe in pursuit.  when he overt
 
 ___________________________
 
ly, and by remote ways, as well as by the power of stick and
stone and clout of hand, were the shackles of white fang's bondage being
riveted upon him.  the qualities in his kind that in the beginning made
it possible for them to come in to the fires of men, were qualities
capable of development.  they were developing in him, and the camp-life,
replete with misery as it was, was secretly endearing itself to him all
the time.  but white fang was unaware of it.  he knew only grief for the
loss of kiche, hope for her return, and a hungry yearning for the free
life that had been his.



chapter iii--the outcast


lip-lip continued so to darken his days that white fang became wickeder
and more ferocious than it was his natural right to be.  savageness was a
part of his make-up, but the savageness thus developed exceeded his make-
up.  he acquired a reputation for wickedness amongst the man-animals
themselves.  wherever there was trouble and uproar in camp, fighting and
squabbling or the outcry o
 
 ___________________________
 
en glad for the
rattle of stones about him, flung by an angry squaw, glad for the hand of
grey beaver descending upon him in wrath; while he would have welcomed
with delight lip-lip and the whole snarling, cowardly pack.

he came to where grey beaver's tepee had stood.  in the centre of the
space it had occupied, he sat down.  he pointed his nose at the moon.  his
throat was afflicted by rigid spasms, his mouth opened, and in a heart-
broken cry bubbled up his loneliness and fear, his grief for kiche, all
his past sorrows and miseries as well as his apprehension of sufferings
and dangers to come.  it was the long wolf-howl, full-throated and
mournful, the first howl he had ever uttered.

the coming of daylight dispelled his fears but increased his loneliness.
the naked earth, which so shortly before had been so populous, thrust his
loneliness more forcibly upon him.  it did not take him long to make up
his mind.  he plunged into the forest and followed the river bank down
the stream.  all d
 
 ___________________________
 
 would
keep the team at a distance and make believe to give meat to lip-lip.

white fang took kindly to the work.  he had travelled a greater distance
than the other dogs in the yielding of himself to the rule of the gods,
and he had learned more thoroughly the futility of opposing their will.
in addition, the persecution he had suffered from the pack had made the
pack less to him in the scheme of things, and man more.  he had not
learned to be dependent on his kind for companionship.  besides, kiche
was well-nigh forgotten; and the chief outlet of expression that remained
to him was in the allegiance he tendered the gods he had accepted as
masters.  so he worked hard, learned discipline, and was obedient.
faithfulness and willingness characterised his toil.  these are essential
traits of the wolf and the wild-dog when they have become domesticated,
and these traits white fang possessed in unusual measure.

a companionship did exist between white fang and the other dogs, but it
was one of w
 
 ___________________________
 
ang worked the covenant out
for himself.  the terms were simple.  for the possession of a flesh-and-
blood god, he exchanged his own liberty.  food and fire, protection and
companionship, were some of the things he received from the god.  in
return, he guarded the god's property, defended his body, worked for him,
and obeyed him.

the possession of a god implies service.  white fang's was a service of
duty and awe, but not of love.  he did not know what love was.  he had no
experience of love.  kiche was a remote memory.  besides, not only had he
abandoned the wild and his kind when he gave himself up to man, but the
terms of the covenant were such that if ever he met kiche again he would
not desert his god to go with her.  his allegiance to man seemed somehow
a law of his being greater than the love of liberty, of kind and kin.



chapter vi--the famine


the spring of the year was at hand when grey beaver finished his long
journey.  it was april, and white fang was a year old when he pull
 
 ___________________________
 
ed into
the home villages and was loosed from the harness by mit-sah.  though a
long way from his full growth, white fang, next to lip-lip, was the
largest yearling in the village.  both from his father, the wolf, and
from kiche, he had inherited stature and strength, and already he was
measuring up alongside the full-grown dogs.  but he had not yet grown
compact.  his body was slender and rangy, and his strength more stringy
than massive. his coat was the true wolf-grey, and to all appearances he
was true wolf himself.  the quarter-strain of dog he had inherited from
kiche had left no mark on him physically, though it had played its part
in his mental make-up.

he wandered through the village, recognising with staid s
 
 ___________________________
 
 an equal by his puzzled elders.
they quickly learned to leave him alone, neither venturing hostile acts
nor making overtures of friendliness.  if they left him alone, he left
them alone--a state of affairs that they found, after a few encounters,
to be pre-eminently desirable.

in midsummer white fang had an experience.  trotting along in his silent
way to investigate a new tepee which had been erected on the edge of the
village while he was away with the hunters after moose, he came full upon
kiche.  he paused and looked at her.  he remembered her vaguely, but he
_remembered_ her, and that was more than could be said for her.  she
lifted her lip at him in the old snarl of menace, and his memory became
clear.  his forgotten cubhood, all that was associated with that familiar
snarl, rushed back to him.  before he had known the gods, she had been to
him the centre-pin of the universe.  the old familiar feelings of that
time came back upon him, surged up within him.  he bounded towards her
jo
 
 ___________________________
 
yously, and she met him with shrewd fangs that laid his cheek open to
the bone.  he did not understand.  he backed away, bewildered and
puzzled.

but it was not kiche's fault.  a wolf-mother was not made to remember her
cubs of a year or so before.  so she did not remember white fang.  he was
a strange animal, an intruder; and her present litter of puppies gave her
the right to resent such intrusion.

one of the puppies sprawled up to white fang.  they were half-brothers,
only they did not know it.  white fang sniffed the puppy curiously,
whereupon kiche rushed upon him, gashing his face a second time.  he
backed farther away.  all the old memories and assoc
 
 ___________________________
 
iations died down
again and passed into the grave from which they had been resurrected.  he
looked at kiche licking her puppy and stopping now and then to snarl at
him.  she was without value to him.  he had learned to get along without
her.  her meaning was forgotten.  there was no place for her in his
scheme of things, as there was no place for him in hers.

he was still standing, stupid and bewildered, the memories forgotten,
wondering what it was all about, when kiche attacked him a third time,
intent on driving him away altogether from the vicinity.  and white fang
allowed himself to be driven away.  this was a female of his kind, and it
was a law of his kind that the males must not fight the females.  he did
not know anything about this law, for it was no generalisation of the
mind, not a something acquired by experience of the world.  he knew it as
a secret prompting, as an urge of instinct--of the same instinct that
made him howl at the moon and stars of
 
 ___________________________
 
 chanced upon him.  thus, he was strong
from the two days' eating a lynx had afforded him when the hungry wolf-
pack ran full tilt upon him.  it was a long, cruel chase, but he was
better nourished than they, and in the end outran them.  and not only did
he outrun them, but, circling widely back on his track, he gathered in
one of his exhausted pursuers.

after that he left that part of the country and journeyed over to the
valley wherein he had been born.  here, in the old lair, he encountered
kiche.  up to her old tricks, she, too, had fled the inhospitable fires
of the gods and gone back to her old refuge to give birth to her young.
of this litter but one remained alive when white fang came upon the
scene, and this one was not destined to live long.  young life had little
chance in such a famine.

kiche's greeting of her grown son was anything but affectionate.  but
white fang did not mind.  he had outgrown his mother.  so he turned tail
philosophically and trotted on up the stream.  at 
 
 ___________________________
 
s to ride, and
white fang knew it.  the horse stood saddled and waiting at the door.
white fang hesitated.  but there was that in him deeper than all the law
he had learned, than the customs that had moulded him, than his love for
the master, than the very will to live of himself; and when, in the
moment of his indecision, collie nipped him and scampered off, he turned
and followed after.  the master rode alone that day; and in the woods,
side by side, white fang ran with collie, as his mother, kiche, and old
one eye had run long years before in the silent northland forest.



chapter v--the sleeping wolf


it was about this time that the newspapers were full of the daring escape
of a convict from san quentin prison.  he was a ferocious man.  he had
been ill-made in the making.  he had not been born right, and he had not
been helped any by the moulding he had received at the hands of society.
the hands of society are harsh, and this man was a striking sample of its
handiwork.  he was a beas
 
 ___________________________
 
of the
wild were white fang's inheritance, and he clung to life, the whole of
him and every part of him, in spirit and in flesh, with the tenacity that
of old belonged to all creatures.

bound down a prisoner, denied even movement by the plaster casts and
bandages, white fang lingered out the weeks.  he slept long hours and
dreamed much, and through his mind passed an unending pageant of
northland visions.  all the ghosts of the past arose and were with him.
once again he lived in the lair with kiche, crept trembling to the knees
of grey beaver to tender his allegiance, ran for his life before lip-lip
and all the howling bedlam of the puppy-pack.

he ran again through the silence, hunting his living food through the
months of famine; and again he ran at the head of the team, the gut-whips
of mit-sah and grey beaver snapping behind, their voices crying "ra!
raa!" when they came to a narrow passage and the team closed together
like a fan to go through.  he lived again all his days with beauty