human beast, it is true, but nevertheless
so terrible a beast that he can best be characterised as carnivorous.

in san quentin prison he had proved incorrigible.  punishment failed to
break his spirit.  he could die dumb-mad and fighting to the last, but he
could not live and be beaten.  the more fiercely he fought, the more
harshly society handled him, and the only effect of harshness was to make
him fiercer.  strait-jackets, starvation, and beatings and clubbings
were the wrong treatment for jim hall; but it was the treatment he
received.  it was the treatment he had received from the time he was a
little pulpy boy in a san francisco slum--soft clay in the hands of
society and ready to be formed into something.

it was during jim hall's third term in prison that he encountered a guard
that was almost as great a beast as he.  the guard treated him unfairly,
lied about him to the warden, lost his credits, persecuted him.  the
difference between them was that the guard carried a bunch of keys 
 
 ___________________________
 
and a
revolver.  jim hall had only his naked hands and his teeth.  but he
sprang upon the guard one day and used his teeth on the other's throat
just like any jungle animal.

after this, jim hall went to live in the incorrigible cell.  he lived
there three years.  the cell was of iron, the floor, the walls, the roof.
he never left this cell.  he never saw the sky nor the sunshine.  day was
a twilight and night was a black silence.  he was in an iron tomb, buried
alive.  he saw no human face, spoke to no human thing.  when his food was
shoved in to him, he growled like a wild animal.  he hated all things.
for days and nights he bellowed his rage at the universe.  for weeks and
months he 
 
 ___________________________
 
ding feet.
and the sleuth-hounds of the law, the paid fighting animals of society,
with telephone, and telegraph, and special train, clung to his trail
night and day.

sometimes they came upon him, and men faced him like heroes, or stampeded
through barbed-wire fences to the delight of the commonwealth reading the
account at the breakfast table.  it was after such encounters that the
dead and wounded were carted back to the towns, and their places filled
by men eager for the man-hunt.

and then jim hall disappeared.  the bloodhounds vainly quested on the
lost trail.  inoffensive ranchers in remote valleys were held up by armed
men and compelled to identify themselves.  while the remains of jim hall
were discovered on a dozen mountain-sides by greedy claimants for blood-
money.

in the meantime the newspapers were read at sierra vista, not so much
with interest as with anxiety.  the women were afraid.  judge scott pooh-
poohed and laughed, but not with reason, for it was in his last days on
the
 
 ___________________________
 
 bench that jim hall had stood before him and received sentence.  and
in open court-room, before all men, jim hall had proclaimed that the day
would come when he would wreak vengeance on the judge that sentenced him.

for once, jim hall was right.  he was innocent of the crime for which he
was sentenced.  it was a case, in the parlance of thieves and police, of
"rail-roading."  jim hall was being "rail-roaded" to prison for a crime
he had not committed.  because of the two prior convictions against him,
judge scott imposed upon him a sentence of fifty years.

judge scott did not know all things, and he did not know that he was
party to a police conspiracy, that the evidence was hatched and perjured,
that jim hall was guiltless of the crime charged.  and jim hall, on the
other hand, did not know that judge scott was merely ignorant.  jim hall
believed that the judge knew all ab
 
 ___________________________
 
out it and was hand in glove with the
police in the perpetration of the monstrous injustice.  so it was, when
the doom of fifty years of living death was uttered by judge scott, that
jim hall, hating all things in the society that misused him, rose up and
raged in the court-room until dragged down by half a dozen of his blue-
coated enemies.  to him, judge scott was the keystone in the arch of
injustice, and upon judge scott he emptied the vials of his wrath and
hurled the threats of his revenge yet to come.  then jim hall went to his
living death . . . and escaped.

of all this white fang knew nothing.  but between him and alice, the
master's wife, there existed a secret.  each nig
 
 ___________________________
 
sorely for
air.

weedon scott pressed a button, and the staircase and downstairs hall were
flooded with light.  then he and judge scott, revolvers in hand,
cautiously descended.  there was no need for this caution.  white fang
had done his work.  in the midst of the wreckage of overthrown and
smashed furniture, partly on his side, his face hidden by an arm, lay a
man.  weedon scott bent over, removed the arm and turned the man's face
upward.  a gaping throat explained the manner of his death.

"jim hall," said judge scott, and father and son looked significantly at
each other.

then they turned to white fang.  he, too, was lying on his side.  his
eyes were closed, but the lids slightly lifted in an effort to look at
them as they bent over him, and the tail was perceptibly agitated in a
vain effort to wag.  weedon scott patted him, and his throat rumbled an
acknowledging growl.  but it was a weak growl at best, and it quickly
ceased.  his eyelids drooped and went shut, and his whole body seemed