enry, an' they'll have you an' me guessin' before this trip's over."

henry laughed defiantly.  "i ain't been trailed this way by wolves
before, but i've gone through a whole lot worse an' kept my health.  takes
more'n a handful of them pesky critters to do for yours truly, bill, my
son."

"i don't know, i don't know," bill muttered ominously.

"well, you'll know all right when we pull into mcgurry."

"i ain't feelin' special enthusiastic," bill persisted.

"you're off colour, that's what's the matter with you," henry dogmatised.
"what you need is quinine, an' i'm goin' to dose you up stiff as soon as
we make mcgurry."

bill grunted his disagreement with the diagnosis, and lapsed into
silence.  the day was like all the days.  light came at nine o'clock.  at
twelve o'clock the southern horizon was warmed by the unseen sun; and
then began the cold grey of afternoon that would merge, three hours
later, into night.

it was just after the sun's futile effort to appear, that bill slipped
the rif
 
 ___________________________
 
ing won the victory.  before she went away, the she-wolf had
found this lair, but the signs told her that the lynx was inside, and she
had not dared to venture in.

after that, the she-wolf in her hunting avoided the left fork.  for she
knew that in the lynx's lair was a litter of kittens, and she knew the
lynx for a fierce, bad-tempered creature and a terrible fighter.  it was
all very well for half a dozen wolves to drive a lynx, spitting and
bristling, up a tree; but it was quite a different matter for a lone wolf
to encounter a lynx--especially when the lynx was known to have a litter
of hungry kittens at her back.

but the wild is the wild, and motherhood is motherhood, at all times
fiercely protective whether in the wild or out of it; and the time was to
come when the she-wolf, for her grey cub's sake, would venture the left
fork, and the lair in the rocks, and the lynx's wrath.



chapter iv--the wall of the world


by the time his mother began leaving the cave on hunting expedition
 
 ___________________________
 
l hurt, and he yelped
and ki-yi'd unceasingly.  this was a different proposition from crouching
in frozen fear while the unknown lurked just alongside.  now the unknown
had caught tight hold of him.  silence would do no good.  besides, it was
not fear, but terror, that convulsed him.

but the slope grew more gradual, and its base was grass-covered.  here
the cub lost momentum.  when at last he came to a stop, he gave one last
agonised yell and then a long, whimpering wail.  also, and quite as a
matter of course, as though in his life he had already made a thousand
toilets, he proceeded to lick away the dry clay that soiled him.

after that he sat up and gazed about him, as might the first man of the
earth who landed upon mars.  the cub had broken through the wall of the
world, the unknown had let go its hold of him, and here he was without
hurt.  but the first man on mars would have experienced less
unfamiliarity than did he.  without any antecedent knowledge, without any
warning whatever 
 
 ___________________________
 
d.

but there were times when even a moose-bird failed to affect him, and
those were times when he felt himself to be in danger from some other
prowling meat hunter.  he never forgot the hawk, and its moving shadow
always sent him crouching into the nearest thicket.  he no longer
sprawled and straddled, and already he was developing the gait of his
mother, slinking and furtive, apparently without exertion, yet sliding
along with a swiftness that was as deceptive as it was imperceptible.

in the matter of meat, his luck had been all in the beginning.  the seven
ptarmigan chicks and the baby weasel represented the sum of his killings.
his desire to kill strengthened with the days, and he cherished hungry
ambitions for the squirrel that chattered so volubly and always informed
all wild creatures that the wolf-cub was approaching.  but as birds flew
in the air, squirrels could climb trees, and the cub could only try to
crawl unobserved upon the squirrel when it was on the ground.

the cub ente
 
 ___________________________
 
ned foot.

the beating that had gone before was as nothing compared with the beating
he now received.  grey beaver's wrath was terrible; likewise was white
fang's fright.  not only the hand, but the hard wooden paddle was used
upon him; and he was bruised and sore in all his small body when he was
again flung down in the canoe.  again, and this time with purpose, did
grey beaver kick him.  white fang did not repeat his attack on the foot.
he had learned another lesson of his bondage.  never, no matter what the
circumstance, must he dare to bite the god who was lord and master over
him; the body of the lord and master was sacred, not to be defiled by the
teeth of such as he.  that was evidently the crime of crimes, the one
offence there was no condoning nor overlooking.

when the canoe touched the shore, white fang lay whimpering and
motionless, waiting the will of grey beaver.  it was grey beaver's will
that he should go ashore, for ashore he was flung, striking heavily on
his side and hur
 
 ___________________________
 
n he knew it to be the anger that proceeds
from a full stomach.  and there was a smell in the air of fish.  there
was food.  the famine was gone.  he came out boldly from the forest and
trotted into camp straight to grey beaver's tepee.  grey beaver was not
there; but kloo-kooch welcomed him with glad cries and the whole of a
fresh-caught fish, and he lay down to wait grey beaver's coming.




part iv


chapter i--the enemy of his kind


had there been in white fang's nature any possibility, no matter how
remote, of his ever coming to fraternise with his kind, such possibility
was irretrievably destroyed when he was made leader of the sled-team.  for
now the dogs hated him--hated him for the extra meat bestowed upon him by
mit-sah; hated him for all the real and fancied favours he received;
hated him for that he fled always at the head of the team, his waving
brush of a tail and his perpetually retreating hind-quarters for ever
maddening their eyes.

and white fang just as bitterly hated t
 
 ___________________________
 
 dogs had quarrels among themselves, but these were forgotten when
trouble was brewing with white fang.

on the other hand, try as they would, they could not kill white fang.  he
was too quick for them, too formidable, too wise.  he avoided tight
places and always backed out of it when they bade fair to surround him.
while, as for getting him off his feet, there was no dog among them
capable of doing the trick.  his feet clung to the earth with the same
tenacity that he clung to life.  for that matter, life and footing were
synonymous in this unending warfare with the pack, and none knew it
better than white fang.

so he became the enemy of his kind, domesticated wolves that they were,
softened by the fires of man, weakened in the sheltering shadow of man's
strength.  white fang was bitter and implacable.  the clay of him was so
moulded.  he declared a vendetta against all dogs.  and so terribly did
he live this vendetta that grey beaver, fierce savage himself, could not
but marvel at whit
 
 ___________________________
 
nd it is on power that godhead rests.  white fang did
not reason it out, did not in his mind make the sharp generalisation that
the white gods were more powerful.  it was a feeling, nothing more, and
yet none the less potent.  as, in his puppyhood, the looming bulks of the
tepees, man-reared, had affected him as manifestations of power, so was
he affected now by the houses and the huge fort all of massive logs.  here
was power.  those white gods were strong.  they possessed greater mastery
over matter than the gods he had known, most powerful among which was
grey beaver.  and yet grey beaver was as a child-god among these white-
skinned ones.

to be sure, white fang only felt these things.  he was not conscious of
them.  yet it is upon feeling, more often than thinking, that animals
act; and every act white fang now performed was based upon the feeling
that the white men were the superior gods.  in the first place he was
very suspicious of them.  there was no telling what unknown terrors w
 
 ___________________________
 
, white fang had another; and the two
of them raged against each other unceasingly.  in the days before, white
fang had had the wisdom to cower down and submit to a man with a club in
his hand; but this wisdom now left him.  the mere sight of beauty smith
was sufficient to send him into transports of fury.  and when they came
to close quarters, and he had been beaten back by the club, he went on
growling and snarling, and showing his fangs.  the last growl could never
be extracted from him.  no matter how terribly he was beaten, he had
always another growl; and when beauty smith gave up and withdrew, the
defiant growl followed after him, or white fang sprang at the bars of the
cage bellowing his hatred.

when the steamboat arrived at dawson, white fang went ashore.  but he
still lived a public life, in a cage, surrounded by curious men.  he was
exhibited as "the fighting wolf," and men paid fifty cents in gold dust
to see him.  he was given no rest.  did he lie down to sleep, he was
stirre
 
 ___________________________
 
he wolf
breeds--to rush in upon him, either directly or with an unexpected
swerve, in the hope of striking his shoulder and overthrowing him.
mackenzie hounds, eskimo and labrador dogs, huskies and malemutes--all
tried it on him, and all failed.  he was never known to lose his footing.
men told this to one another, and looked each time to see it happen; but
white fang always disappointed them.

then there was his lightning quickness.  it gave him a tremendous
advantage over his antagonists.  no matter what their fighting
experience, they had never encountered a dog that moved so swiftly as he.
also to be reckoned with, was the immediateness of his attack.  the
average dog was accustomed to the preliminaries of snarling and bristling
and growling, and the average dog was knocked off his feet and finished
before he had begun to fight or recovered from his surprise.  so often
did this happen, that it became the custom to hold white fang until the
other dog went through its preliminaries, was 
 
 ___________________________
 
 metallic and
steel-like as they flashed upon the crowd.  beauty smith regained his
feet and came toward him, sniffling and cowardly.  the new-comer did not
understand.  he did not know how abject a coward the other was, and
thought he was coming back intent on fighting.  so, with a "you beast!"
he smashed beauty smith over backward with a second blow in the face.
beauty smith decided that the snow was the safest place for him, and lay
where he had fallen, making no effort to get up.

"come on, matt, lend a hand," the newcomer called the dog-musher, who had
followed him into the ring.

both men bent over the dogs.  matt took hold of white fang, ready to pull
when cherokee's jaws should be loosened.  this the younger man
endeavoured to accomplish by clutching the bulldog's jaws in his hands
and trying to spread them.  it was a vain undertaking.  as he pulled and
tugged and wrenched, he kept exclaiming with every expulsion of breath,
"beasts!"

the crowd began to grow unruly, and some of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 men were protesting
against the spoiling of the sport; but they were silenced when the
newcomer lifted his head from his work for a moment and glared at them.

"you damn beasts!" he finally exploded, and went back to his task.

"it's no use, mr. scott, you can't break 'm apart that way," matt said at
last.

the pair paused and surveyed the locked dogs.

"ain't bleedin' much," matt announced.  "ain't got all the way in yet."

"but he's liable to any moment," scott answered.  "there, did you see
that!  he shifted his grip in a bit."

the younger man's excitement and apprehension for white fang was growing.
he struck cherokee about the head savagely again and again.  but that did
not loosen the jaws.  cherokee wagged the stump of his tail in
advertisement that he understood the meaning of the blows, but that he
knew he was himself in the right and only doing his duty by kee
 
 ___________________________
 
ping his
grip.

"won't some of you help?" scott cried desperately at the crowd.

but no help was offered.  instead, the crowd began sarcastically to cheer
him on and showered him with facetious advice.

"you'll have to get a pry," matt counselled.

the other reached into the holster at his hip, drew his revolver, and
tried to thrust its muzzle between the bull-dog's jaws.  he shoved, and
shoved hard, till the grating of the steel against the locked teeth could
be distinctly heard.  both men were on their knees, bending over the
dogs.  tim keenan strode into the ring.  he paused beside scott and
touched him on the shoulder, saying ominously:

"don't break them teeth, stranger."

"then i'll break his neck," scott retorted, cont
 
 ___________________________
 
n't mind telling
you that's something i ain't worked out for myself.  i don't know how to
turn the trick."

"then get out of the way," was the reply, "and don't bother me.  i'm
busy."

tim keenan continued standing over him, but scott took no further notice
of his presence.  he had managed to get the muzzle in between the jaws on
one side, and was trying to get it out between the jaws on the other
side.  this accomplished, he pried gently and carefully, loosening the
jaws a bit at a time, while matt, a bit at a time, extricated white
fang's mangled neck.

"stand by to receive your dog," was scott's peremptory order to
cherokee's owner.

the faro-dealer stooped down obediently and got a firm hold on cherokee.

"now!" scott warned, giving the final pry.

the dogs were drawn apart, the bull-dog struggling vigorously.

"take him away," scott commanded, and tim keenan dragged cherokee back
into the crowd.

white fang made several ineffectual efforts to get up.  once he gained
his feet, but his 
 
 ___________________________
 
legs were too weak to sustain him, and he slowly wilted
and sank back into the snow.  his eyes were half closed, and the surface
of them was glassy.  his jaws were apart, and through them the tongue
protruded, draggled and limp.  to all appearances he looked like a dog
that had been strangled to death.  matt examined him.

"just about all in," he announced; "but he's breathin' all right."

beauty smith had regained his feet and come over to look at white fang.

"matt, how much is a good sled-dog worth?" scott asked.

the dog-musher, still on his knees and stooped over white fang,
calculated for a moment.

"three hundred dollars," he answered.

"and how much for one that's all chewed up like this one?" scott asked,
nudging white fang with his foot.

"half of that," was the dog-musher's judgment.  scott turned upon beauty
smith.

"did you hear, mr. beast?  i'm going to take your dog from you, and i'm
going to give you a hundred and fifty for him."

he opened 
 
 ___________________________
 
al pal of his."

"i thought he must be somebody," was the faro-dealer's comment.  "that's
why i kept my hands offen him at the start."



chapter v--the indomitable


"it's hopeless," weedon scott confessed.

he sat on the step of his cabin and stared at the dog-musher, who
responded with a shrug that was equally hopeless.

together they looked at white fang at the end of his stretched chain,
bristling, snarling, ferocious, straining to get at the sled-dogs.  having
received sundry lessons from matt, said lessons being imparted by means
of a club, the sled-dogs had learned to leave white fang alone; and even
then they were lying down at a distance, apparently oblivious of his
existence.

"it's a wolf and there's no taming it," weedon scott announced.

"oh, i don't know about that," matt objected.  "might be a lot of dog in
'm, for all you can tell.  but there's one thing i know sure, an' that
there's no gettin' away from."

the dog-musher paused and nodded his head confidentially at mooseh
 
 ___________________________
 
ide
mountain.

"well, don't be a miser with what you know," scott said sharply, after
waiting a suitable length of time.  "spit it out.  what is it?"

the dog-musher indicated white fang with a backward thrust of his thumb.

"wolf or dog, it's all the same--he's ben tamed 'ready."

"no!"

"i tell you yes, an' broke to harness.  look close there.  d'ye see them
marks across the chest?"

"you're right, matt.  he was a sled-dog before beauty smith got hold of
him."

"and there's not much reason against his bein' a sled-dog again."

"what d'ye think?" scott queried eagerly.  then the hope died down as he
added, shaking his head, "we've had him two weeks now, and if anything
he's wilder than ever at the present moment."

"give 'm a chance," matt counselled.  "turn 'm loose for a spell."

the other looked at him incredulously.

"yes," matt went on, "i know you've tried to, but you didn't take a
club."
 
 ___________________________
 


"you try it then."

the dog-musher secured a club and went over to the chained animal.  white
fang watched the club after the manner of a caged lion watching the whip
of its trainer.

"see 'm keep his eye on that club," matt said.  "that's a good sign.  he's
no fool.  don't dast tackle me so long as i got that club handy.  he's
not clean crazy, sure."

as the man's hand approached his neck, white fang bristled and snarled
and crouched down.  but while he eyed the approaching hand, he at the
same time contrived to keep track of the club in the other hand,
suspended threateningly above him.  matt unsnapped the chain from the
collar and stepped back.

white fang could scarcely realise that he was free.  many months ha
 
 ___________________________
 
f it.  perhaps some new devilry of the gods
was about to be perpetrated on him.  he walked slowly and cautiously,
prepared to be assailed at any moment.  he did not know what to do, it
was all so unprecedented.  he took the precaution to sheer off from the
two watching gods, and walked carefully to the corner of the cabin.
nothing happened.  he was plainly perplexed, and he came back again,
pausing a dozen feet away and regarding the two men intently.

"won't he run away?" his new owner asked.

matt shrugged his shoulders.  "got to take a gamble.  only way to find
out is to find out."

"poor devil," scott murmured pityingly.  "what he needs is some show of
human kindness," he added, turning and going into the cabin.

he came out with a piece of meat, which he tossed to white fang.  he
sprang away from it, and from a distance studied it suspiciously.

"hi-yu, major!" matt shouted warningly, but too late.

major had made a spring for the meat.  at the instant his jaws closed on
it, white fan
 
 ___________________________
 
g struck him.  he was overthrown.  matt rushed in, but
quicker than he was white fang.  major staggered to his feet, but the
blood spouting from his throat reddened the snow in a widening path.

"it's too bad, but it served him right," scott said hastily.

but matt's foot had already started on its way to kick white fang.  there
was a leap, a flash of teeth, a sharp exclamation.  white fang, snarling
fiercely, scrambled backward for several yards, while matt stooped and
investigated his leg.

"he got me all right," he announced, pointing to the torn trousers and
undercloths, and the growing stain of red.

"i told you it was hopeless, matt," scott said in a discouraged voice.
"i've thought about it off and on, while not wanting to think of it.  but
we've come to it now.  it's the only thing to do."

as he talked, with reluctant movements he drew his revolver, threw open
the cylinder, and assured himself of its contents.

"look here, mr. scott," matt
 
 ___________________________
 
ugh hell.  you
can't expect 'm to come out a white an' shinin' angel.  give 'm time."

"look at major," the other rejoined.

the dog-musher surveyed the stricken dog.  he had sunk down on the snow
in the circle of his blood and was plainly in the last gasp.

"served 'm right.  you said so yourself, mr. scott.  he tried to take
white fang's meat, an' he's dead-o.  that was to be expected.  i wouldn't
give two whoops in hell for a dog that wouldn't fight for his own meat."

"but look at yourself, matt.  it's all right about the dogs, but we must
draw the line somewhere."

"served me right," matt argued stubbornly.  "what'd i want to kick 'm
for?  you said yourself that he'd done right.  then i had no right to
kick 'm."

"it would be a mercy to kill him," scott insisted.  "he's untamable."

"now look here, mr. scott, give the poor devil a fightin' chance.  he
ain't had no chance yet.  he's just come through hell, an' this is the
first time he's ben loose.  give 'm a fair chance, an' if he don
 
 ___________________________
 
't
deliver the goods, i'll kill 'm myself.  there!"

"god knows i don't want to kill him or have him killed," scott answered,
putting away the revolver.  "we'll let him run loose and see what
kindness can do for him.  and here's a try at it."

he walked over to white fang and began talking to him gently and
soothingly.

"better have a club handy," matt warned.

scott shook his head and went on trying to win white fang's confidence.

white fang was suspicious.  something was impending.  he had killed this
god's dog, bitten his companion god, and what else was to be expected
than some terrible punishment?  but in the face of it he was indomitable.
he bristled and showed his teeth, his eyes vigilant, his whole body wary
and prepared for anything.  the god had no club, so he suffered him to
approach quite near.  the god's hand had come out and wa
 
 ___________________________
 
and still the hand descended.  he did not want to
bite the hand, and he endured the peril of it until his instinct surged
up in him, mastering him with its insatiable yearning for life.

weedon scott had believed that he was quick enough to avoid any snap or
slash.  but he had yet to learn the remarkable quickness of white fang,
who struck with the certainty and swiftness of a coiled snake.

scott cried out sharply with surprise, catching his torn hand and holding
it tightly in his other hand.  matt uttered a great oath and sprang to
his side.  white fang crouched down, and backed away, bristling, showing
his fangs, his eyes malignant with menace.  now he could expect a beating
as fearful as any he had received from beauty smith.

"here!  what are you doing?" scott cried suddenly.

matt had dashed into the cabin and come out with a rifle.

"nothin'," he said slowly, with a careless calmness that was assumed,
"only goin' to keep that promise i made.  i reckon it's up to me to kill
'm as i s
 
 ___________________________
 
aid i'd do."

"no you don't!"

"yes i do.  watch me."

as matt had pleaded for white fang when he had been bitten, it was now
weedon scott's turn to plead.

"you said to give him a chance.  well, give it to him.  we've only just
started, and we can't quit at the beginning.  it served me right, this
time.  and--look at him!"

white fang, near the corner of the cabin and forty feet away, was
snarling with blood-curdling viciousness, not at scott, but at the dog-
musher.

"well, i'll be everlastingly gosh-swoggled!" was the dog-musher's
expression of astonish
 
 ___________________________
 
ment.

"look at the intelligence of him," scott went on hastily.  "he knows the
meaning of firearms as well as you do.  he's got intelligence and we've
got to give that intelligence a chance.  put up the gun."

"all right, i'm willin'," matt agreed, leaning the rifle against the
woodpile.

"but will you look at that!" he exclaimed the next moment.

white fang had quieted down and ceased snarling.  "this is worth
investigatin'.  watch."

matt, reached for the rifle, and at the same moment white fang snarled.
he stepped away from the rifle, and white fang's lifted lips descended,
covering his teeth.

"now, just for fun."

matt took the rifle and began slowly to raise it to his shoulder.  white
fang's snarling began with the movement, and increased as the movement
approached its culmination.  but the moment before the rifle came to a
level on him, he leaped sidewise behind the corner of the cabin.  matt
stood staring along the sights 
 
 ___________________________
 
he will of him toward
personal liberty.  and yet it was not physically painful.  on the
contrary, it was even pleasant, in a physical way.  the patting movement
slowly and carefully changed to a rubbing of the ears about their bases,
and the physical pleasure even increased a little.  yet he continued to
fear, and he stood on guard, expectant of unguessed evil, alternately
suffering and enjoying as one feeling or the other came uppermost and
swayed him.

"well, i'll be gosh-swoggled!"

so spoke matt, coming out of the cabin, his sleeves rolled up, a pan of
dirty dish-water in his hands, arrested in the act of emptying the pan by
the sight of weedon scott patting white fang.

at the instant his voice broke the silence, white fang leaped back,
snarling savagely at him.

matt regarded his employer with grieved disapproval.

"if you don't mind my expressin' my feelin's, mr. scott, i'll make free
to say you're seventeen kinds of a damn fool an' all of 'em different,
an' then some."

weedon scot
 
 ___________________________
 
abin door,
he let alone--though he watched him vigilantly until the door opened and
he received the endorsement of the master.  but the man who went softly,
by circuitous ways, peering with caution, seeking after secrecy--that was
the man who received no suspension of judgment from white fang, and who
went away abruptly, hurriedly, and without dignity.

weedon scott had set himself the task of redeeming white fang--or rather,
of redeeming mankind from the wrong it had done white fang.  it was a
matter of principle and conscience.  he felt that the ill done white fang
was a debt incurred by man and that it must be paid.  so he went out of
his way to be especially kind to the fighting wolf.  each day he made it
a point to caress and pet white fang, and to do it at length.

at first suspicious and hostile, white fang grew to like this petting.
but there was one thing that he never outgrew--his growling.  growl he
would, from the moment the petting began till it ended.  but it was a
growl with
 
 ___________________________
 
ical inability to express it.

he learned to adjust himself in many ways to his new mode of life.  it
was borne in upon him that he must let his master's dogs alone.  yet his
dominant nature asserted itself, and he had first to thrash them into an
acknowledgment of his superiority and leadership.  this accomplished, he
had little trouble with them.  they gave trail to him when he came and
went or walked among them, and when he asserted his will they obeyed.

in the same way, he came to tolerate matt--as a possession of his master.
his master rarely fed him.  matt did that, it was his business; yet white
fang divined that it was his master's food he ate and that it was his
master who thus fed him vicariously.  matt it was who tried to put him
into the harness and make him haul sled with the other dogs.  but matt
failed.  it was not until weedon scott put the harness on white fang and
worked him, that he understood.  he took it as his master's will that
matt should drive him and work him jus
 
 ___________________________
 
e mackenzie toboggans were the klondike sleds with
runners under them.  and different was the method of driving the dogs.
there was no fan-formation of the team.  the dogs worked in single file,
one behind another, hauling on double traces.  and here, in the klondike,
the leader was indeed the leader.  the wisest as well as strongest dog
was the leader, and the team obeyed him and feared him.  that white fang
should quickly gain this post was inevitable.  he could not be satisfied
with less, as matt learned after much inconvenience and trouble.  white
fang picked out the post for himself, and matt backed his judgment with
strong language after the experiment had been tried.  but, though he
worked in the sled in the day, white fang did not forego the guarding of
his master's property in the night.  thus he was on duty all the time,
ever vigilant and faithful, the most valuable of all the dogs.

"makin' free to spit out what's in me," matt said one day, "i beg to
state that you was a wise gu
 
 ___________________________
 
fterwards that his packing had preceded the master's
disappearance; but at the time he suspected nothing.  that night he
waited for the master to return.  at midnight the chill wind that blew
drove him to shelter at the rear of the cabin.  there he drowsed, only
half asleep, his ears keyed for the first sound of the familiar step.
but, at two in the morning, his anxiety drove him out to the cold front
stoop, where he crouched, and waited.

but no master came.  in the morning the door opened and matt stepped
outside.  white fang gazed at him wistfully.  there was no common speech
by which he might learn what he wanted to know.  the days came and went,
but never the master.  white fang, who had never known sickness in his
life, became sick.  he became very sick, so sick that matt was finally
compelled to bring him inside the cabin.  also, in writing to his
employer, matt devoted a postscript to white fang.

weedon scott reading the letter down in circle city, came upon the
following:

"that 
 
 ___________________________
 
dam wolf won't work.  won't eat.  aint got no spunk left.  all the
dogs is licking him.  wants to know what has become of you, and i don't
know how to tell him.  mebbe he is going to die."

it was as matt had said.  white fang had ceased eating, lost heart, and
allowed every dog of the team to thrash him.  in the cabin he lay on the
floor near the stove, without interest in food, in matt, nor in life.
matt might talk gently to him or swear at him, it was all the same; he
never did more than turn his dull eyes upon the man, then drop his head
back to its customary position on his fore-paws.

and then, one night, matt, reading to himself with moving lips and
mumbled sounds, was startled by a low whine from white fang.  he had got
upon his feet, his ears cocked towards the door, and he was listening
intently.  a moment later, matt heard a footstep.  the door opened, and
weedon scott stepped in.  the
 
 ___________________________
 
 two men shook hands.  then scott looked
around the room.

"where's the wolf?" he asked.

then he discovered him, standing where he had been lying, near to the
stove.  he had not rushed forward after the manner of other dogs.  he
stood, watching and waiting.

"holy smoke!" matt exclaimed.  "look at 'm wag his tail!"

weedon scott strode half across the room toward him, at the same time
calling him.  white fang came to him, not with a great bound, yet
quickly.  he was awakened from self-consciousness, but as he drew near,
his eyes took on a strange expression.  something, an incommunicable
vastness of feeling, rose up into his eyes as a light and shone forth.

"he never looked at me that way all the time you was gone!" matt
commented.

weedon scott did not hear.  he wa
 
 ___________________________
 
he crooning note of the growl more pronounced than ever.

but that was not all.  what of his joy, the great love in him, ever
surging and struggling to express itself, succeeded in finding a new
mode of expression.  he suddenly thrust his head forward and nudged his
way in between the master's arm and body.  and here, confined, hidden
from view all except his ears, no longer growling, he continued to nudge
and snuggle.

the two men looked at each other.  scott's eyes were shining.

"gosh!" said matt in an awe-stricken voice.

a moment later, when he had recovered himself, he said, "i always
insisted that wolf was a dog.  look at 'm!"

with the return of the love-master, white fang's recovery was rapid.  two
nights and a day he spent in the cabin.  then he sallied forth.  the sled-
dogs had forgotten his prowess.  they remembered only the latest, which
was his weakness and sickness.  at the sight of him as he came out of the
cabin, they sprang upon him.

"talk about your rough-houses," matt
 
 ___________________________
 
n him, the fear of hurt and of the
trap, that had given rise to the panicky impulses to avoid contacts.  it
was the mandate of his instinct that that head must be free.  and now,
with the love-master, his snuggling was the deliberate act of putting
himself into a position of hopeless helplessness.  it was an expression
of perfect confidence, of absolute self-surrender, as though he said: "i
put myself into thy hands.  work thou thy will with me."

one night, not long after the return, scott and matt sat at a game of
cribbage preliminary to going to bed.  "fifteen-two, fifteen-four an' a
pair makes six," matt was pegging up, when there was an outcry and sound
of snarling without.  they looked at each other as they started to rise
to their feet.

"the wolf's nailed somebody," matt said.

a wild scream of fear and anguish hastened them.

"bring a light!" scott shouted, as he sprang outside.

matt followed with the lamp, and by its light they saw a man lying on his
back in the snow.  his arms 
 
 ___________________________
 
ly
making his attack on the most vulnerable spot.  from shoulder to wrist of
the crossed arms, the coat-sleeve, blue flannel shirt and undershirt were
ripped in rags, while the arms themselves were terribly slashed and
streaming blood.

all this the two men saw in the first instant.  the next instant weedon
scott had white fang by the throat and was dragging him clear.  white
fang struggled and snarled, but made no attempt to bite, while he quickly
quieted down at a sharp word from the master.

matt helped the man to his feet.  as he arose he lowered his crossed
arms, exposing the bestial face of beauty smith.  the dog-musher let go
of him precipitately, with action similar to that of a man who has picked
up live fire.  beauty smith blinked in the lamplight and looked about
him.  he caught sight of white fang and terror rushed into his face.

at the same moment matt noticed two objects lying in the snow.  he held
the lamp close to them, indicating them with his toe for his employer's
benef
 
 ___________________________
 
ious whine, like
a sobbing under the breath that had just grown audible.  then came the
long sniff, as white fang reassured himself that his god was still inside
and had not yet taken himself off in mysterious and solitary flight.

"i do believe that wolf's on to you," the dog-musher said.

weedon scott looked across at his companion with eyes that almost
pleaded, though this was given the lie by his words.

"what the devil can i do with a wolf in california?" he demanded.

"that's what i say," matt answered.  "what the devil can you do with a
wolf in california?"

but this did not satisfy weedon scott.  the other seemed to be judging
him in a non-committal sort of way.

"white man's dogs would have no show against him," scott went on.  "he'd
kill them on sight.  if he didn't bankrupt me with damage suits, the
authorities would take him away from me and electrocute him."

"he's a downright murderer, i know," was the dog-musher's comment.

weedon scott looked at him suspiciously.

"it would
 
 ___________________________
 
 never do," he said decisively.

"it would never do!" matt concurred.  "why you'd have to hire a man
'specially to take care of 'm."

the other's suspicion was allayed.  he nodded cheerfully.  in the silence
that followed, the low, half-sobbing whine was heard at the door and then
the long, questing sniff.

"there's no denyin' he thinks a hell of a lot of you," matt said.

the other glared at him in sudden wrath.  "damn it all, man!  i know my
own mind and what's best!"

"i'm agreein' with you, only . . . "

"only what?" scott snapped out.

"only . . . " the dog-musher began softly, then changed his mind and
betrayed a rising anger of his own.  "well, you needn't get so all-fired
het up about it.  judgin' by your actions one'd think you didn't know
your own mind."

weedon scott debated with himself for a while, and then said more gently:
"you are right, ma
 
 ___________________________
 
tt.  i don't know my own mind, and that's what's the
trouble."

"why, it would be rank ridiculousness for me to take that dog along," he
broke out after another pause.

"i'm agreein' with you," was matt's answer, and again his employer was
not quite satisfied with him.

"but how in the name of the great sardanapolis he knows you're goin' is
what gets me," the dog-musher continued innocently.

"it's beyond me, matt," scott answered, with a mournful shake of the
head.

then came the day when, through the open cabin door, white fang saw the
fatal grip on the floor and the love-master packing things into it.  also,
there were comings and goings, and the erstwhile placid atmosphere of the
cabin was vexed with strange perturbations and unrest.  here was
indubitable evidence.  white fang had already scented it.  he now
reasoned it.  his god was preparing for another flight.  and since he had
not taken him with 
 
 ___________________________
 
him before, so, now, he could look to be left behind.

that night he lifted the long wolf-howl.  as he had howled, in his puppy
days, when he fled back from the wild to the village to find it vanished
and naught but a rubbish-heap to mark the site of grey beaver's tepee, so
now he pointed his muzzle to the cold stars and told to them his woe.

inside the cabin the two men had just gone to bed.

"he's gone off his food again," matt remarked from his bunk.

there was a grunt from weedon scott's bunk, and a stir of blankets.

"from the way he cut up the other time you went away, i wouldn't wonder
this time but what he died."

the blankets in the other bunk stirred irritably.

"oh, shut up!" scott cried out through the darkness.  "you nag worse than
a woman."

"i'm agreein' with you," the dog-musher answered, and weedon scott was
not quite sure whether or not the other had snickered.

the next day white fang's anxiety and re
 
 ___________________________
 
stlessness were even more
pronounced.  he dogged his master's heels whenever he left the cabin, and
haunted the front stoop when he remained inside.  through the open door
he could catch glimpses of the luggage on the floor.  the grip had been
joined by two large canvas bags and a box.  matt was rolling the master's
blankets and fur robe inside a small tarpaulin.  white fang whined as he
watched the operation.

later on two indians arrived.  he watched them closely as they shouldered
the luggage and were led off down the hill by matt, who carried the
bedding and the grip.  but white fang did not follow them.  the master
was still in the cabin.  after a time, matt returned.  the master came to
the door and called white fang inside.

"you poor devil," he said gently, rubbing white fa
 
 ___________________________
 
ng's ears and tapping
his spine.  "i'm hitting the long trail, old man, where you cannot
follow.  now give me a growl--the last, good, good-bye growl."

but white fang refused to growl.  instead, and after a wistful, searching
look, he snuggled in, burrowing his head out of sight between the
master's arm and body.

"there she blows!" matt cried.  from the yukon arose the hoarse bellowing
of a river steamboat.  "you've got to cut it short.  be sure and lock the
front door.  i'll go out the back.  get a move on!"

the two doors slammed at the same moment, and weedon scott waited for
matt to come around to the front.  from inside the door came a low
whining and sobbing.  then there were long, deep-drawn sniffs.

"you must take good care of him, matt," scott said, as they started down
the hill.  "write and let me know how he gets al
 
 ___________________________
 
howl when their masters
lie dead.  he was voicing an utter woe, his cry bursting upward in great
heart-breaking rushes, dying down into quavering misery, and bursting
upward again with a rush upon rush of grief.

the _aurora_ was the first steamboat of the year for the outside, and her
decks were jammed with prosperous adventurers and broken gold seekers,
all equally as mad to get to the outside as they had been originally to
get to the inside.  near the gang-plank, scott was shaking hands with
matt, who was preparing to go ashore.  but matt's hand went limp in the
other's grasp as his gaze shot past and remained fixed on something
behind him.  scott turned to see.  sitting on the deck several feet away
and watching wistfully was white fang.

the dog-musher swore softly, in awe-stricken accents.  scott could only
look in wonder.

"did you lock the front door?" matt demanded.  the other nodded, and
asked, "how about the back?"

"you just bet i did," was the fervent reply.

white fang flatte
 
 ___________________________
 
ned his ears ingratiatingly, but remained where he was,
making no attempt to approach.

"i'll have to take 'm ashore with me."

matt made a couple of steps toward white fang, but the latter slid away
from him.  the dog-musher made a rush of it, and white fang dodged
between the legs of a group of men.  ducking, turning, doubling, he slid
about the deck, eluding the other's efforts to capture him.

but when the love-master spoke, white fang came to him with prompt
obedience.

"won't come to the hand that's fed 'm all these months," the dog-musher
muttered resentfully.  "and you--you ain't never fed 'm after them first
days of
 
 ___________________________
 
 gettin' acquainted.  i'm blamed if i can see how he works it out
that you're the boss."

scott, who had been patting white fang, suddenly bent closer and pointed
out fresh-made cuts on his muzzle, and a gash between the eyes.

matt bent over and passed his hand along white fang's belly.

"we plumb forgot the window.  he's all cut an' gouged underneath.  must
'a' butted clean through it, b'gosh!"

but weedon scott was not listening.  he was thinking rapidly.  the
_aurora's_ whistle hooted a final announcement of departure.  men were
scurrying down the gang-plank to the shore.  matt loosened the bandana
from his own neck and started to put it around white fang's.  scott
grasped the dog-musher's hand.

"good-bye, matt, old m
 
 ___________________________
 
an.  about the wolf--you needn't write.  you see,
i've . . . !"

"what!" the dog-musher exploded.  "you don't mean to say . . .?"

"the very thing i mean.  here's your bandana.  i'll write to you about
him."

matt paused halfway down the gang-plank.

"he'll never stand the climate!" he shouted back.  "unless you clip 'm in
warm weather!"

the gang-plank was hauled in, and the _aurora_ swung out from the bank.
weedon scott waved a last good-bye.  then he turned and bent over white
fang, standing by his side.

"now growl, damn you, growl," he said, as he patted the responsive head
and rubbed the flattening ears.



chapter ii--the southland


white fang landed from the steamer in san francisco.  he was app
 
 ___________________________
 
had known were replaced by towering buildings.  the
streets were crowded with perils--waggons, carts, automobiles; great,
straining horses pulling huge trucks; and monstrous cable and electric
cars hooting and clanging through the midst, screeching their insistent
menace after the manner of the lynxes he had known in the northern woods.

all this was the manifestation of power.  through it all, behind it all,
was man, governing and controlling, expressing himself, as of old, by his
mastery over matter.  it was colossal, stunning.  white fang was awed.
fear sat upon him.  as in his cubhood he had been made to feel his
smallness and puniness on the day he first came in from the wild to the
village of grey beaver, so now, in his full-grown stature and pride of
strength, he was made to feel small and puny.  and there were so many
gods!  he was made dizzy by the swarming of them.  the thunder of the
streets smote upon his ears.  he was bewildered by the tremendous and
endless rush and movement 
 
 ___________________________
 
of things.  as never before, he felt his
dependence on the love-master, close at whose heels he followed, no
matter what happened never losing sight of him.

but white fang was to have no more than a nightmare vision of the city--an
experience that was like a bad dream, unreal and terrible, that haunted
him for long after in his dreams.  he was put into a baggage-car by the
master, chained in a corner in the midst of heaped trunks and valises.
here a squat and brawny god held sway, with much noise, hurling trunks
and boxes about, dragging them in through the door and tossing them into
the piles, or flingin
 
 ___________________________
 
o about in a circle, his shoulder presented to her, his head turned
from her, and on his face and in his eyes a patient and bored expression.
sometimes, however, a nip on his hind-quarters hastened his retreat and
made it anything but stately.  but as a rule he managed to maintain a
dignity that was almost solemnity.  he ignored her existence whenever it
was possible, and made it a point to keep out of her way.  when he saw or
heard her coming, he got up and walked off.

there was much in other matters for white fang to learn.  life in the
northland was simplicity itself when compared with the complicated
affairs of sierra vista.  first of all, he had to learn the family of the
master.  in a way he was prepared to do this.  as mit-sah and kloo-kooch
had belonged to grey beaver, sharing his food, his fire, and his
blankets, so now, at sierra vista, belonged to the love-master all the
denizens of the house.

but in this matter there was a difference, and many differences.  sierra
vista was a
 
 ___________________________
 
ure,
he would get up and stalk determinedly away from them.  but after a time,
he grew even to like the children.  still he was not demonstrative.  he
would not go up to them.  on the other hand, instead of walking away at
sight of them, he waited for them to come to him.  and still later, it
was noticed that a pleased light came into his eyes when he saw them
approaching, and that he looked after them with an appearance of curious
regret when they left him for other amusements.

all this was a matter of development, and took time.  next in his regard,
after the children, was judge scott.  there were two reasons, possibly,
for this.  first, he was evidently a valuable possession of the master's,
and next, he was undemonstrative.  white fang liked to lie at his feet on
the wide porch when he read the newspaper, from time to time favouring
white fang with a look or a word--untroublesome tokens that he recognised
white fang's presence and existence.  but this was only when the master
was not 
 
 ___________________________
 
never regarded the members of the family
in any other light than possessions of the love-master.

also white fang had early come to differentiate between the family and
the servants of the household.  the latter were afraid of him, while he
merely refrained from attacking them.  this because he considered that
they were likewise possessions of the master.  between white fang and
them existed a neutrality and no more.  they cooked for the master and
washed the dishes and did other things just as matt had done up in the
klondike.  they were, in short, appurtenances of the household.

outside the household there was even more for white fang to learn.  the
master's domain was wide and complex, yet it had its metes and bounds.
the land itself ceased at the county road.  outside was the common domain
of all gods--the roads and streets.  then inside other fences were the
particular domains of other gods.  a myriad laws governed all these
things and determined conduct; yet he did not know the spee
 
 ___________________________
 
owed
along smoothly, and neither fear nor foe lurked by the way.

he missed the snow without being aware of it.  "an unduly long summer,"
would have been his thought had he thought about it; as it was, he merely
missed the snow in a vague, subconscious way.  in the same fashion,
especially in the heat of summer when he suffered from the sun, he
experienced faint longings for the northland.  their only effect upon
him, however, was to make him uneasy and restless without his knowing
what was the matter.

white fang had never been very demonstrative.  beyond his snuggling and
the throwing of a crooning note into his love-growl, he had no way of
expressing his love.  yet it was given him to discover a third way.  he
had always been susceptible to the laughter of the gods.  laughter had
affected him with madness, made him frantic with rage.  but he did not
have it in him to be angry with the love-master, and when that god
elected to laugh at him in a good-natured, bantering way, he was
nonplus