led and showed her teeth.  nor was she above
slashing his shoulder sharply on occasion.  at such times he betrayed no
anger.  he merely sprang to the side and ran stiffly ahead for several
awkward leaps, in carriage and conduct resembling an abashed country
swain.

this was his one trouble in the running of the pack; but she had other
troubles.  on her other side ran a gaunt old wolf, grizzled and marked
with the scars of many battles.  he ran always on her right side.  the
fact that he had but one eye, and that the left eye, might account for
this.  he, also, was addicted to crowding her, to veering toward her till
his scarred muzzle touched her body, or shoulder, or neck.  as with the
running mate on the left, she repelled these attentions with her teeth;
but when both bestowed their attentions at the same time she was roughly
jostled, being compelled, with quick snaps to either side, to drive both
lovers away and at the same time to maintain her forward leap with the
pack and see the way o
 
 ___________________________
 
 ripped and tore the yielding flesh, all for the possession of her.

and in the business of love the three-year-old, who had made this his
first adventure upon it, yielded up his life.  on either side of his body
stood his two rivals.  they were gazing at the she-wolf, who sat smiling
in the snow.  but the elder leader was wise, very wise, in love even as
in battle.  the younger leader turned his head to lick a wound on his
shoulder.  the curve of his neck was turned toward his rival.  with his
one eye the elder saw the opportunity.  he darted in low and closed with
his fangs.  it was a long, ripping slash, and deep as well.  his teeth,
in passing, burst the wall of the great vein of the throat.  then he
leaped clear.

the young leader snarled terribly, but his snarl broke midmost into a
tickling cough.  bleeding and coughing, already stricken, he sprang at
the elder and fought while life faded from him, his legs going weak
beneath him, the light of day dulling on his eyes, his blows and spri
 
 ___________________________
 
ngs
falling shorter and shorter.

and all the while the she-wolf sat on her haunches and smiled.  she was
made glad in vague ways by the battle, for this was the love-making of
the wild, the sex-tragedy of the natural world that was tragedy only to
those that died.  to those that survived it was not tragedy, but
realisation and achievement.

when the young leader lay in the snow and moved no more, one eye stalked
over to the she-wolf.  his carriage was one of mingled triumph and
caution.  he was plainly expectant of a rebuff, and he was just as
plainly surprised when her teeth did not flash out at him in anger.  for
the first time she met him with a kindly manner.  she sniffed noses with
him, and even condescended to leap about and frisk and play with him in
quite puppyish fashion.  and he, for all his grey years and sage
experience, behaved quite as puppyishly and even a little more foolishly.

 
 ___________________________
 

forgotten already were the vanquished rivals and the love-tale
red-written on the snow.  forgotten, save once, when old one eye stopped
for a moment to lick his stiffening wounds.  then it was that his lips
half writhed into a snarl, and the hair of his neck and shoulders
involuntarily bristled, while he half crouched for a spring, his claws
spasmodically clutching into the snow-surface for firmer footing.  but it
was all forgotten the next moment, as he sprang after the she-wolf, who
was coyly leading him a chase through the woods.

after that they ran side by side, like good friends who have come to an
understanding. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the days passed by, and they kept together, hunting their
meat and killing and eating it in common.  after a time the she-wolf
began to grow restless.  she seemed to be searching for something that
she could not find.  the hollows under fallen trees seemed to attract
her, and she spent much time nosing about among the larger snow-piled
crevices in the rocks and in the caves of overhanging banks.  old one eye
was not interested at all, but he followed her good-naturedly in her
quest, and when her investigations in particular places were unusually
protracted, he would lie down and wait until she was ready to go on.

they did not remain in one place, but travelled across country until they
regained the mackenzie river, down which they slowly went, leaving it
often to hunt game along the small streams that entered it, but always
returning to it again.  sometimes they chanced upon other wolves, usually

 
 ___________________________
 
 intercourse displayed on
either side, no gladness at meeting, no desire to return to the
pack-formation.  several times they encountered solitary wolves.  these
were always males, and they were pressingly insistent on joining with one
eye and his mate.  this he resented, and when she stood shoulder to
shoulder with him, bristling and showing her teeth, the aspiring solitary
ones would back off, turn-tail, and continue on their lonely way.

one moonlight night, running through the quiet forest, one eye suddenly
halted.  his muzzle went up, his tail stiffened, and his nostrils dilated
as he scented the air.  one foot also he held up, after the manner of a
dog.  he was not satisfied, and he continued to smell the air, striving
to understand the message borne upon it to him.  one careless sniff had
satisfied his mate, and she trotted on to reassure him.  though he
followed her, he was still dubious, and he could not forbear an
occasional halt in order more carefully to study the warning.

she cr
 
 ___________________________
 
ept out cautiously on the edge of a large open space in the midst
of the trees.  for some time she stood alone.  then one eye, creeping and
crawling, every sense on the alert, every hair radiating infinite
suspicion, joined her.  they stood side by side, watching and listening
and smelling.

to their ears came the sounds of dogs wrangling and scuffling, the
guttural cries of men, the sharper voices of scolding women, and once the
shrill and plaintive cry of a child.  with the exception of the huge
bulks of the skin-lodges, little could be seen save the flames of the
fire, broken by the movements of intervening bodies,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and the smoke rising
slowly on the quiet air.  but to their nostrils came the myriad smells of
an indian camp, carrying a story that was largely incomprehensible to one
eye, but every detail of which the she-wolf knew.

she was strangely stirred, and sniffed and sniffed with an increasing
delight.  but old one eye was doubtful.  he betrayed his apprehension,
and started tentatively to go.  she turned and touched his neck with her
muzzle in a reassuring way, then regarded the camp again.  a new
wistfulness was in her face, but it was not the wistfulness of hunger.
she was thrilling to a desire that urged her to go forward, to be in
closer to that fire, to be squabbling with the dogs, and to be avoiding
and dodging the stumbling feet of men.

one eye moved impatiently beside her; her unrest came back upon 
 
 ___________________________
 
her, and
she knew again her pressing need to find the thing for which she
searched.  she turned and trotted back into the forest, to the great
relief of one eye, who trotted a little to the fore until they were well
within the shelter of the trees.

as they slid along, noiseless as shadows, in the moonlight, they came
upon a run-way.  both noses went down to the footprints in the snow.
these footprints were very fresh.  one eye ran ahead cautiously, his mate
at his heels.  the broad pads of their feet were spread wide and in
contact with the snow were like velvet.  one eye caught sight of a dim
movement of white in the midst of the white.  his sliding gait had been
deceptively swift, but it was as nothing to the speed at which he now
ran.  before him was bounding the faint patch of white he had discovered.

they were running along a narrow alley flanked on either side by a growth
of young spruce.  through the trees th
 
 ___________________________
 
e mouth of the alley could be seen,
opening out on a moonlit glade.  old one eye was rapidly overhauling the
fleeing shape of white.  bound by bound he gained.  now he was upon it.
one leap more and his teeth would be sinking into it.  but that leap was
never made.  high in the air, and straight up, soared the shape of white,
now a struggling snowshoe rabbit that leaped and bounded, executing a
fantastic dance there above him in the air and never once returning to
earth.

one eye sprang back with a snort of sudden fright, then shrank down to
the snow and crouched, snarling threats at this thing of fear he did not
understand.  but the she-wolf coolly thrust past him.  she poised for a
moment, then sprang for the dancing rabbit.  she, too, soared high, but
not so high as the quarry, and her teeth clipped emptily together with a
metallic snap.  she made another leap, and another.

her mate had slowly relaxed from his crouch and was watching her.  he now
evinced displeasure
 
 ___________________________
 
own the side of the she-wolf's muzzle.  for him to resent such reproof
was equally unexpected to her, and she sprang upon him in snarling
indignation.  then he discovered his mistake and tried to placate her.
but she proceeded to punish him roundly, until he gave over all attempts
at placation, and whirled in a circle, his head away from her, his
shoulders receiving the punishment of her teeth.

in the meantime the rabbit danced above them in the air.  the she-wolf
sat down in the snow, and old one eye, now more in fear of his mate than
of the mysterious sapling, again sprang for the rabbit.  as he sank back
with it between his teeth, he kept his eye on the sapling.  as before, it
followed him back to earth.  he crouched down under the impending blow,
his hair bristling, but his teeth still keeping tight hold of the rabbit.
but the blow did not fall.  the sapling remained bent above him.  when he
moved it moved, and he growled at it through his clenched jaws; when he
remained still, it remain
 
 ___________________________
 
ontinue remaining still.  yet the warm blood of the rabbit tasted good
in his mouth.

it was his mate who relieved him from the quandary in which he found
himself.  she took the rabbit from him, and while the sapling swayed and
teetered threateningly above her she calmly gnawed off the rabbit's head.
at once the sapling shot up, and after that gave no more trouble,
remaining in the decorous and perpendicular position in which nature had
intended it to grow.  then, between them, the she-wolf and one eye
devoured the game which the mysterious sapling had caught for them.

there were other run-ways and alleys where rabbits were hanging in the
air, and the wolf-pair prospected them all, the she-wolf leading the way,
old one eye following and observant, learning the method of robbing
snares--a knowledge destined to stand him in good stead in the days to
come.



chapter ii--the lair


for two days the she-wolf and one eye hung about the indian camp.  he was
worried and apprehensive, yet the camp l
 
 ___________________________
 
ured his mate and she was loath
to depart.  but when, one morning, the air was rent with the report of a
rifle close at hand, and a bullet smashed against a tree trunk several
inches from one eye's head, they hesitated no more, but went off on a
long, swinging lope that put quick miles between them and the danger.

they did not go far--a couple of days' journey.  the she-wolf's need to
find the thing for which she searched had now become imperative.  she was
getting very heavy, and could run but slowly.  once, in the pursuit of a
rabbit, which she ordinarily would have caught with ease, she gave over
and lay down and rested.  one eye came to her; but when he touched her
neck gently with
 
 ___________________________
 
at the mouth of the cave and looked the wall over carefully.
then, on one side and the other, she ran along the base of the wall to
where its abrupt bulk merged from the softer-lined landscape.  returning
to the cave, she entered its narrow mouth.  for a short three feet she
was compelled to crouch, then the walls widened and rose higher in a
little round chamber nearly six feet in diameter.  the roof barely
cleared her head.  it was dry and cosey.  she inspected it with
painstaking care, while one eye, who had returned, stood in the entrance
and patiently watched her.  she dropped her head, with her nose to the
ground and directed toward a point near to her closely bunched feet, and
around this point she circled several times; then, with a tired sigh that
was almost a grunt, she curled her body in, relaxed her legs, and dropped
down, her head toward the entrance.  one eye, with pointed, interested
ears, laughed at her, and beyond, outlined against the white light, she
could see the brush of 
 
 ___________________________
 
his tail waving good-naturedly.  her own ears,
with a snuggling movement, laid their sharp points backward and down
against the head for a moment, while her mouth opened and her tongue
lolled peaceably out, and in this way she expressed that she was pleased
and satisfied.

one eye was hungry.  though he lay down in the entrance and slept, his
sleep was fitful.  he kept awaking and cocking his ears at the bright
world without, where the april sun was blazing across the snow.  when he
dozed, upon his ears would steal the faint whispers of hidden trickles of
running water, and he would rouse and listen intently.  the sun had come
back, and all the awakening northland world was calling to him.  life was
stirring.  the feel of spring was in the air, the feel of growing life
u
 
 ___________________________
 
er to him.

his mate looked at him anxiously.  every little while she emitted a low
growl, and at times, when it seemed to her he approached too near, the
growl shot up in her throat to a sharp snarl.  of her own experience she
had no memory of the thing happening; but in her instinct, which was the
experience of all the mothers of wolves, there lurked a memory of fathers
that had eaten their new-born and helpless progeny.  it manifested itself
as a fear strong within her, that made her prevent one eye from more
closely inspecting the cubs he had fathered.

but there was no danger.  old one eye was feeling the urge of an impulse,
that was, in turn, an instinct that had come down to him from all the
fathers of wolves.  he did not question it, nor puzzle over it.  it was
there, in the fibre of his being; and it was the most natural thing in
the world that he should obey it by turning his back on his new-born
family and by trotting out and away on the meat-trail whereby he lived.

five or six mi
 
 ___________________________
 
t and found it so recent that he
crouched swiftly, and looked in the direction in which it disappeared.
then he turned deliberately and took the right fork.  the footprint was
much larger than the one his own feet made, and he knew that in the wake
of such a trail there was little meat for him.

half a mile up the right fork, his quick ears caught the sound of gnawing
teeth.  he stalked the quarry and found it to be a porcupine, standing
upright against a tree and trying his teeth on the bark.  one eye
approached carefully but hopelessly.  he knew the breed, though he had
never met it so far north before; and never in his long life had
porcupine served him for a meal.  but he had long since learned that
there was such a thing as chance, or opportunity, and he continued to
draw near.  there was never any telling what might happen, for with live
things events were somehow always happening differently.

the porcupine rolled itself into a ball, radiating long, sharp needles in
all directions that
 
 ___________________________
 
 defied attack.  in his youth one eye had once sniffed
too near a similar, apparently inert ball of quills, and had the tail
flick out suddenly in his face.  one quill he had carried away in his
muzzle, where it had remained for weeks, a rankling flame, until it
finally worked out.  so he lay down, in a comfortable crouching position,
his nose fully a foot away, and out of the line of the tail.  thus he
waited, keeping perfectly quiet.  there was no telling.  something might
happen.  the porcupine might unroll.  there might be oppo
 
 ___________________________
 
adow, as he crept and circled
around, and came up well to leeward of the silent, motionless pair.

he lay down in the snow, depositing the ptarmigan beside him, and with
eyes peering through the needles of a low-growing spruce he watched the
play of life before him--the waiting lynx and the waiting porcupine, each
intent on life; and, such was the curiousness of the game, the way of
life for one lay in the eating of the other, and the way of life for the
other lay in being not eaten.  while old one eye, the wolf crouching in
the covert, played his part, too, in the game, waiting for some strange
freak of chance, that might help him on the meat-trail which was his way
of life.

half an hour passed, an hour; and nothing happened.  the ball of quills
might have been a stone for all it moved; the lynx might have been frozen
to marble; and old one eye might have been dead.  yet all three animals
were keyed to a tenseness of living that was almost painful, and scarcely
ever would it come to them to
 
 ___________________________
 
 be more alive than they were then in their
seeming petrifaction.

one eye moved slightly and peered forth with increased eagerness.
something was happening.  the porcupine had at last decided that its
enemy had gone away.  slowly, cautiously, it was unrolling its ball of
impregnable armour.  it was agitated by no tremor of anticipation.
slowly, slowly, the bristling ball straightened out and lengthened.  one
eye watching, felt a sudden moistness in his mouth and a drooling of
saliva, involuntary, excited by the living meat that was spreading itself
like a repast befo
 
 ___________________________
 
claws curving like talons, shot under the
tender belly and came back with a swift ripping movement.  had the
porcupine been entirely unrolled, or had it not discovered its enemy a
fraction of a second before the blow was struck, the paw would have
escaped unscathed; but a side-flick of the tail sank sharp quills into it
as it was withdrawn.

everything had happened at once--the blow, the counter-blow, the squeal
of agony from the porcupine, the big cat's squall of sudden hurt and
astonishment.  one eye half arose in his excitement, his ears up, his
tail straight out and quivering behind him.  the lynx's bad temper got
the best of her.  she sprang savagely at the thing that had hurt her.  but
the porcupine, squealing and grunting, with disrupted anatomy trying
feebly to roll up into its ball-protection, flicked out its tail again,
and again the big cat squalled with hurt and astonishment.  then she fell
to backing away and sneezing, her nose bristling with quills like a
monstrous pin-cushion. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 she brushed her nose with her paws, trying to
dislodge the fiery darts, thrust it into the snow, and rubbed it against
twigs and branches, and all the time leaping about, ahead, sidewise, up
and down, in a frenzy of pain and fright.

she sneezed continually, and her stub of a tail was doing its best toward
lashing about by giving quick, violent jerks.  she quit her antics, and
quieted down for a long minute.  one eye watched.  and even he could not
repress a start and an involuntary bristling of hair along his back when
she suddenly leaped, without warning, straight up in the air, at the same
time emitting a long and most terrible squall.  then she sprang away, up
the trail, squalling with every leap she made.

it was not until her racket had faded away in the distance and died out
that one eye ventured forth.  he walked as delicately as though all the
snow were carpeted with porcupine quills, erect and rea
 
 ___________________________
 
dy to pierce the
soft pads of his feet.  the porcupine met his approach with a furious
squealing and a clashing of its long teeth.  it had managed to roll up in
a ball again, but it was not quite the old compact ball; its muscles were
too much torn for that.  it had been ripped almost in half, and was still
bleeding profusely.

one eye scooped out mouthfuls of the blood-soaked snow, and chewed and
tasted and swallowed.  this served as a relish, and his hunger increased
mightily; but he was too old in the world to forget his caution.  he
waited.  he lay down and waited, while the porcupine grated its teeth and
uttered grunts and sobs and occasional sharp little squeals.  in a little
while, one eye noticed that the quills were drooping and that a great
quivering had set up.  the quivering came to an end suddenly.  there was
a f
 
 ___________________________
 
inal defiant clash of the long teeth.  then all the quills drooped
quite down, and the body relaxed and moved no more.

with a nervous, shrinking paw, one eye stretched out the porcupine to its
full length and turned it over on its back.  nothing had happened.  it
was surely dead.  he studied it intently for a moment, then took a
careful grip with his teeth and started off down the stream, partly
carrying, partly dragging the porcupine, with head turned to the side so
as to avoid stepping on the prickly mass.  he recollected something,
dropped the burden, and trotted back to where he had left the ptarmigan.
he did not hesitate a moment.  he knew clea
 
 ___________________________
 
 toning
down.  he was behaving as a wolf-father should, and manifesting no unholy
desire to devour the young lives she had brought into the world.



chapter iii--the grey cub


he was different from his brothers and sisters.  their hair already
betrayed the reddish hue inherited from their mother, the she-wolf; while
he alone, in this particular, took after his father.  he was the one
little grey cub of the litter.  he had bred true to the straight wolf-
stock--in fact, he had bred true to old one eye himself, physically, with
but a single exception, and that was he had two eyes to his father's one.

the grey cub's eyes had not been open long, yet already he could see with
steady clearness.  and while his eyes were still closed, he had felt,
tasted, and smelled.  he knew his two brothers and his two sisters very
well.  he had begun to romp with them in a feeble, awkward way, and even
to squabble, his little throat vibrating with a queer rasping noise (the
forerunner of the growl), as he work
 
 ___________________________
 
 experienced famine.  there came
a time when not only did the meat-supply cease, but the milk no longer
came from his mother's breast.  at first, the cubs whimpered and cried,
but for the most part they slept.  it was not long before they were
reduced to a coma of hunger.  there were no more spats and squabbles, no
more tiny rages nor attempts at growling; while the adventures toward the
far white wall ceased altogether.  the cubs slept, while the life that
was in them flickered and died down.

one eye was desperate.  he ranged far and wide, and slept but little in
the lair that had now become cheerless and miserable.  the she-wolf, too,
left her litter and went out in search of meat.  in the first days after
the birth of the cubs, one eye had journeyed several times back to the
indian camp and robbed the rabbit snares; but, with the melting of the
snow and the opening of the streams, the indian camp had moved away, and
that source of supply was closed to him.

when the grey cub came back to 
 
 ___________________________
 

longer lifted her head nor moved about.  his little body rounded out with
the meat he now ate; but the food had come too late for her.  she slept
continuously, a tiny skeleton flung round with skin in which the flame
flickered lower and lower and at last went out.

then there came a time when the grey cub no longer saw his father
appearing and disappearing in the wall nor lying down asleep in the
entrance.  this had happened at the end of a second and less severe
famine.  the she-wolf knew why one eye never came back, but there was no
way by which she could tell what she had seen to the grey cub.  hunting
herself for meat, up the left fork of the stream where lived the lynx,
she had followed a day-old trail of one eye.  and she had found him, or
what remained of him, at the end of the trail.  there were many signs of
the battle that had been fought, and of the lynx's withdrawal to her lair
after having won the victory.  before she went away, the she-wolf had
found this lair, but the signs to
 
 ___________________________
 
leaving the cave on hunting expeditions, the
cub had learned well the law that forbade his approaching the entrance.
not only had this law been forcibly and many times impressed on him by
his mother's nose and paw, but in him the instinct of fear was
developing.  never, in his brief cave-life, had he encountered anything
of which to be afraid.  yet fear was in him.  it had come down to him
from a remote ancestry through a thousand thousand lives.  it was a
heritage he had received directly from one eye and the she-wolf; but to
them, in turn, it had been passed down through all the generations of
wolves that had gone before.  fear!--that legacy of the wild which no
animal may escape nor exchange for pottage.

so the grey cub knew fear, though he knew not the stuff of which fear was
made.  possibly he accepted it as one of the restrictions of life.  for
he had already learned that there were such restrictions.  hunger he had
known; and when he could not appease his hunger he had felt restrictio
 
 ___________________________
 
 were beyond knowing--but the wonder and awe that he had of
these man-animals in ways resembled what would be the wonder and awe of
man at sight of some celestial creature, on a mountain top, hurling
thunderbolts from either hand at an astonished world.

the last dog had been driven back.  the hubbub died down.  and white fang
licked his hurts and meditated upon this, his first taste of pack-cruelty
and his introduction to the pack.  he had never dreamed that his own kind
consisted of more than one eye, his mother, and himself.  they had
constituted a kind apart, and here, abruptly, he had discovered many more
creatures apparently of his own kind.  and there was a subconscious
resentment that these, his kind, at first sight had pitched upon him and
tried to destroy him.  in the same way he resented his mother being tied
with a stick, even though it was done by the superior man-animals.  it
savoured of the trap, of bondage.  yet of the trap and of bondage he knew
nothing.  freedom to roam and 
 
 ___________________________
 
white fang knew it.  the horse stood saddled and waiting at the door.
white fang hesitated.  but there was that in him deeper than all the law
he had learned, than the customs that had moulded him, than his love for
the master, than the very will to live of himself; and when, in the
moment of his indecision, collie nipped him and scampered off, he turned
and followed after.  the master rode alone that day; and in the woods,
side by side, white fang ran with collie, as his mother, kiche, and old
one eye had run long years before in the silent northland forest.



chapter v--the sleeping wolf


it was about this time that the newspapers were full of the daring escape
of a convict from san quentin prison.  he was a ferocious man.  he had
been ill-made in the making.  he had not been born right, and he had not
been helped any by the moulding he had received at the hands of society.
the hands of society are harsh, and this man was a striking sample of its
handiwork.  he was a beast--a human beast,