red down the river.

quite deliberately he determined to stay behind.  he waited his
opportunity to slink out of camp to the woods.  here, in the running
stream where ice was beginning to form, he hid his trail.  then he
crawled into the heart of a dense thicket and waited.  the time passed
by, and he slept intermittently for hours.  then he was aroused by grey
beaver's voice calling him by name.  there were other voices.  white fang
could hear grey beaver's squaw taking part in the search, and mit-sah,
who was grey beaver's son.

white fang trembled with fear, and though the impulse came to crawl out
of his hiding-place, he resisted it.  after a time the voices died away,
and some time after that he crept out to enjoy the success of his
undertaking.  darkness was coming on, and for a while he played about
among the trees, pleasuring in his freedom.  then, and quite suddenly, he
became aware of loneliness.  he sat down to consider, listening to the
silence of the forest and perturbed by it.  
 
 ___________________________
 
ow, slippery under foot, that hid
from him the landscape he traversed, and that covered over the
inequalities of the ground so that the way of his feet was more difficult
and painful.

grey beaver had intended camping that night on the far bank of the
mackenzie, for it was in that direction that the hunting lay.  but on the
near bank, shortly before dark, a moose coming down to drink, had been
espied by kloo-kooch, who was grey beaver's squaw.  now, had not the
moose come down to drink, had not mit-sah been steering out of the course
because of the snow, had not kloo-kooch sighted the moose, and had not
grey beaver killed it with a lucky shot from his rifle, all subsequent
things would have happened differently.  grey beaver would not have
camped on the near side of the mackenzie, and white fang would have
passed by and gone on, either to die or to find his way to his wild
brothers and become one of them--a wolf to the end of his days.

night had fallen.  the snow was flying more thickly, and
 
 ___________________________
 
im from the other dogs while he
ate.  after that, grateful and content, white fang lay at grey beaver's
feet, gazing at the fire that warmed him, blinking and dozing, secure in
the knowledge that the morrow would find him, not wandering forlorn
through bleak forest-stretches, but in the camp of the man-animals, with
the gods to whom he had given himself and upon whom he was now dependent.



chapter v--the covenant


when december was well along, grey beaver went on a journey up the
mackenzie.  mit-sah and kloo-kooch went with him.  one sled he drove
himself, drawn by dogs he had traded for or borrowed.  a second and
smaller sled was driven by mit-sah, and to this was harnessed a team of
puppies.  it was more of a toy affair than anything else, yet it was the
delight of mit-sah, who felt that he was beginning to do a man's work in
the world.  also, he was learning to drive dogs and to train dogs; while
the puppies themselves were being broken in to the harness.  furthermore,
the sled was of s
 
 ___________________________
 
river.  but the most peculiar virtue of all lay in the fact that
the dog that strove to attack one in front of him must pull the sled
faster, and that the faster the sled travelled, the faster could the dog
attacked run away.  thus, the dog behind could never catch up with the
one in front.  the faster he ran, the faster ran the one he was after,
and the faster ran all the dogs.  incidentally, the sled went faster, and
thus, by cunning indirection, did man increase his mastery over the
beasts.

mit-sah resembled his father, much of whose grey wisdom he possessed.  in
the past he had observed lip-lip's persecution of white fang; but at that
time lip-lip was another man's dog, and mit-sah had never dared more than
to shy an occasional stone at him.  but now lip-lip was his dog, and he
proceeded to wreak his vengeance on him by putting him at the end of the
longest rope.  this made lip-lip the leader, and was apparently an
honour! but in reality it took away from him all honour, and instead of
b
 
 ___________________________
 
m was his
bushy tail and fleeing hind legs--a view far less ferocious and
intimidating than his bristling mane and gleaming fangs.  also, dogs
being so constituted in their mental ways, the sight of him running away
gave desire to run after him and a feeling that he ran away from them.

the moment the sled started, the team took after lip-lip in a chase that
extended throughout the day.  at first he had been prone to turn upon his
pursuers, jealous of his dignity and wrathful; but at such times mit-sah
would throw the stinging lash of the thirty-foot cariboo-gut whip into
his face and compel him to turn tail and run on.  lip-lip might face the
pack, but he could not face that whip, and all that was left him to do
was to keep his long rope taut and his flanks ahead of the teeth of his
mates.

but a still greater cunning lurked in the recesses of the indian mind.  to
give point to unending pursuit of the leader, mit-sah favoured him over
the other dogs.  these favours aroused in them jealousy a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd hatred.  in
their presence mit-sah would give him meat and would give it to him only.
this was maddening to them.  they would rage around just outside the
throwing-distance of the whip, while lip-lip devoured the meat and mit-
sah protected him.  and when there was no meat to give, mit-sah would
keep the team at a distance and make believe to give meat to lip-lip.

white fang took kindly to the work.  he had travelled a greater distance
than the other dogs in the yielding of himself to the rule of the gods,
and he had learned more thoroughly the futility of opposing their will.
in addition, the persecution he had suffered from the pack had made the
pack less to him in the scheme of things, and man more.  he had not
learned to be dependent on his kind for companionship.  besides, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 unusual measure.

a companionship did exist between white fang and the other dogs, but it
was one of warfare and enmity.  he had never learned to play with them.
he knew only how to fight, and fight with them he did, returning to them
a hundred-fold the snaps and slashes they had given him in the days when
lip-lip was leader of the pack.  but lip-lip was no longer leader--except
when he fled away before his mates at the end of his rope, the sled
bounding along behind.  in camp he kept close to mit-sah or grey beaver
or kloo-kooch.  he did not dare venture away from the gods, for now the
fangs of all dogs were against him, and he tasted to the dregs the
persecution that had been white fang's.

with the overthrow of lip-lip, white fang could have become leader of the
pack.  but he was too morose and solitary for that.  he merely thrashed
his team-mates.  otherwise he ignored them.  they got out of his way when
he came along; nor did the boldest of them ever dare to rob him of his
meat.  on the
 
 ___________________________
 
ed into the snow, and
that his club-hand had been ripped wide open by white fang's teeth.

but white fang knew that he had broken the law of the gods.  he had
driven his teeth into the sacred flesh of one of them, and could expect
nothing but a most terrible punishment.  he fled away to grey beaver,
behind whose protecting legs he crouched when the bitten boy and the
boy's family came, demanding vengeance.  but they went away with
vengeance unsatisfied.  grey beaver defended white fang.  so did mit-sah
and kloo-kooch.  white fang, listening to the wordy war and watching the
angry gestures, knew that his act was justified.  and so it came that he
learned there were gods and gods.  there were his gods, and there were
other gods, and between them there was a difference.  justice or
injustice, it was all the same, he must take all things from the hands of
his own gods.  but he was not compelled to take injustice from the other
gods.  it was his privilege to resent it with his teeth.  and this als
 
 ___________________________
 
o
was a law of the gods.

before the day was out, white fang was to learn more about this law.  mit-
sah, alone, gathering firewood in the forest, encountered the boy that
had been bitten.  with him were other boys.  hot words passed.  then all
the boys attacked mit-sah.  it was going hard with him.  blows were
raining upon him from all sides.  white fang looked on at first.  this
was an affair of the gods, and no concern of his.  then he realised that
this was mit-sah, one of his own particular gods, who was being
maltreated.  it was no reasoned impulse that made white fang do what he
then did.  a mad rush of anger sent him leaping in amongst the
combatants.  five minutes later the landscape was covered with fleeing
boys, many of whom dripped blood upon the snow in token that white fang's
teeth had not been idle.  when mit-sah told the story in camp, grey
beaver ordered meat to be given to white fang.  he ordered much meat to
be given, and white fang, gorged
 
 ___________________________
 
 wild and his kind when he gave himself up to man, but the
terms of the covenant were such that if ever he met kiche again he would
not desert his god to go with her.  his allegiance to man seemed somehow
a law of his being greater than the love of liberty, of kind and kin.



chapter vi--the famine


the spring of the year was at hand when grey beaver finished his long
journey.  it was april, and white fang was a year old when he pulled into
the home villages and was loosed from the harness by mit-sah.  though a
long way from his full growth, white fang, next to lip-lip, was the
largest yearling in the village.  both from his father, the wolf, and
from kiche, he had inherited stature and strength, and already he was
measuring up alongside the full-grown dogs.  but he had not yet grown
compact.  his body was slender and rangy, and his strength more stringy
than massive. his coat was the true wolf-grey, and to all appearances he
was true wolf himself.  the quarter-strain of dog he had inherite
 
 ___________________________
 
ee.  grey beaver was not
there; but kloo-kooch welcomed him with glad cries and the whole of a
fresh-caught fish, and he lay down to wait grey beaver's coming.




part iv


chapter i--the enemy of his kind


had there been in white fang's nature any possibility, no matter how
remote, of his ever coming to fraternise with his kind, such possibility
was irretrievably destroyed when he was made leader of the sled-team.  for
now the dogs hated him--hated him for the extra meat bestowed upon him by
mit-sah; hated him for all the real and fancied favours he received;
hated him for that he fled always at the head of the team, his waving
brush of a tail and his perpetually retreating hind-quarters for ever
maddening their eyes.

and white fang just as bitterly hated them back.  being sled-leader was
anything but gratifying to him.  to be compelled to run away before the
yelling pack, every dog of which, for three years, he had thrashed and
mastered, was almost more than he could endure.  but endure 
 
 ___________________________
 
it he must,
or perish, and the life that was in him had no desire to perish out.  the
moment mit-sah gave his order for the start, that moment the whole team,
with eager, savage cries, sprang forward at white fang.

there was no defence for him.  if he turned upon them, mit-sah would
throw the stinging lash of the whip into his face.  only remained to him
to run away.  he could not encounter that howling horde with his tail and
hind-quarters.  these were scarcely fit weapons with which to meet the
many merciless fangs.  so run away he did, violating his own nature and
pride with every leap he made, and leaping all day long.

one cannot violate the promptings of one's nature without having that
nature recoil upon itself.  such a recoil is like that of a hair, made to
g
 
 ___________________________
 
 by the day-
long pursuit of him, swayed subconsciously by the insistent iteration on
their brains of the sight of him fleeing away, mastered by the feeling of
mastery enjoyed all day, the dogs could not bring themselves to give way
to him.  when he appeared amongst them, there was always a squabble.  his
progress was marked by snarl and snap and growl.  the very atmosphere he
breathed was surcharged with hatred and malice, and this but served to
increase the hatred and malice within him.

when mit-sah cried out his command for the team to stop, white fang
obeyed.  at first this caused trouble for the other dogs.  all of them
would spring upon the hated leader only to find the tables turned.  behind
him would be mit-sah, the great whip singing in his hand.  so the dogs
came to understand that when the team stopped by order, white fang was to
be let alone.  but when white fang stopped without orders, then it was
allowed them to spring upon him and destroy him if they could.  after
several expe
 
 ___________________________
 
ately.  but as a rule he managed to maintain a
dignity that was almost solemnity.  he ignored her existence whenever it
was possible, and made it a point to keep out of her way.  when he saw or
heard her coming, he got up and walked off.

there was much in other matters for white fang to learn.  life in the
northland was simplicity itself when compared with the complicated
affairs of sierra vista.  first of all, he had to learn the family of the
master.  in a way he was prepared to do this.  as mit-sah and kloo-kooch
had belonged to grey beaver, sharing his food, his fire, and his
blankets, so now, at sierra vista, belonged to the love-master all the
denizens of the house.

but in this matter there was a difference, and many differences.  sierra
vista was a far vaster affair than the tepee of grey beaver.  there were
many persons to be considered.  there was judge scott, and there was his
wife.  there were the master's two sisters, beth and mary.  there was his
wife, alice, and then there wer
 
 ___________________________
 
e slept long hours and
dreamed much, and through his mind passed an unending pageant of
northland visions.  all the ghosts of the past arose and were with him.
once again he lived in the lair with kiche, crept trembling to the knees
of grey beaver to tender his allegiance, ran for his life before lip-lip
and all the howling bedlam of the puppy-pack.

he ran again through the silence, hunting his living food through the
months of famine; and again he ran at the head of the team, the gut-whips
of mit-sah and grey beaver snapping behind, their voices crying "ra!
raa!" when they came to a narrow passage and the team closed together
like a fan to go through.  he lived again all his days with beauty smith
and the fights he had fought.  at such times he whimpered and snarled in
his sleep, and they that looked on said that his dreams were bad.

but there was one particular nightmare from which he suffered--the
clanking, clanging monsters of electric cars that were to him colossal
screaming lynxes.  h