t of him, was
prodigious.  in order to discover the necessary area, nature had given
him an enormous prognathous jaw.  it was wide and heavy, and protruded
outward and down until it seemed to rest on his chest.  possibly this
appearance was due to the weariness of the slender neck, unable properly
to support so great a burden.

this jaw gave the impression of ferocious determination.  but something
lacked.  perhaps it was from excess.  perhaps the jaw was too large.  at
any rate, it was a lie.  beauty smith was known far and wide as the
weakest of weak-kneed and snivelling cowards.  to complete his
description, his teeth were large and yellow, while the two eye-teeth,
larger than their fellows, showed under his lean lips like fangs.  his
eyes were yellow and muddy, as though nature had run short on pigments
and squeezed together the dregs of all her tubes.  it was the same with
his hair, sparse and irregular of growth, muddy-yellow and dirty-yellow,
rising on his head and sprouting out of his face
 
 ___________________________
 
 in unexpected tufts and
bunches, in appearance like clumped and wind-blown grain.

in short, beauty smith was a monstrosity, and the blame of it lay
elsewhere.  he was not responsible.  the clay of him had been so moulded
in the making.  he did the cooking for the other men in the fort, the
dish-washing and the drudgery.  they did not despise him.  rather did
they tolerate him in a broad human way, as one tolerates any creature
evilly treated in the making.  also, they feared him.  his cowardly rages
made them dread a shot in the back or poison in their coffee.  but
somebody had to do the cooking, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and whatever else his shortcomings,
beauty smith could cook.

this was the man that looked at white fang, delighted in his ferocious
prowess, and desired to possess him.  he made overtures to white fang
from the first.  white fang began by ignoring him.  later on, when the
overtures became more insistent, white fang bristled and bared his teeth
and backed away.  he did not like the man.  the feel of him was bad.  he
sensed the evil in him, and feared the extended hand and the attempts at
soft-spoken speech.  because of all this, he hated the 
 
 ___________________________
 
man.

with the simpler creatures, good and bad are things simply understood.
the good stands for all things that bring easement and satisfaction and
surcease from pain.  therefore, the good is liked.  the bad stands for
all things that are fraught with discomfort, menace, and hurt, and is
hated accordingly.  white fang's feel of beauty smith was bad.  from the
man's distorted body and twisted mind, in occult ways, like mists rising
from malarial marshes, came emanations of the unhealth within.  not by
reasoning, not by the five senses alone, but by other and remoter and
uncharted senses, came the feeling to white fang that the man was ominous
with evil, pregnant with hurtfulness, and therefore a thing bad, and
wisely to be hated.

white fang was in grey beaver's camp when beauty smith first visited it.
at the faint sound of his dis
 
 ___________________________
 
  the man laughed at this; and white fang slunk away
to the sheltering woods, his head turned to observe as he glided softly
over the ground.

grey beaver refused to sell the dog.  he had grown rich with his trading
and stood in need of nothing.  besides, white fang was a valuable animal,
the strongest sled-dog he had ever owned, and the best leader.
furthermore, there was no dog like him on the mackenzie nor the yukon.  he
could fight.  he killed other dogs as easily as men killed mosquitoes.
(beauty smith's eyes lighted up at this, and he licked his thin lips with
an eager tongue).  no, white fang was not for sale at any price.

but beauty smith knew the ways of indians.  he visited grey beaver's camp
often, and hidden under his coat was always a black bottle or so.  one of
the potencies of whisky is the breeding of thirst.  grey beaver got the
thirst.  his fevered membranes and burnt stomach began to clamour for
more and more of the scorching fluid; while his brain, thrust all awry by
the unwon
 
 ___________________________
 
ted stimulant, permitted him to go any length to obtain it.  the
money he had received for his furs and mittens and moccasins began to go.
it went faster and faster, and the shorter his money-sack grew, the
shorter grew his temper.

in the end his money and goods and temper were all gone.  nothing
remained to him but his thirst, a prodigious possession in itself that
grew more prodigious with every sober breath he drew.  then it was that
beauty smith had talk with him again about the sale of white fang; but
this time the price offered was in bottles, not dollars, and grey
beaver's ears were more eager to hear.

"you ketch um dog you take um all right," was his last word.

the bottles were delivered, but after two days.  "you ketch um dog," were
beauty smith's words to grey beaver.

white fang slunk into camp one evening and dropped down with a sigh of
content.  the dreaded white god was not there.  for days his
manifestations of desire to l
 
 ___________________________
 
is hand.  in the other hand he held a
bottle, which, from time to time, was inverted above his head to the
accompaniment of gurgling noises.

an hour of this passed, when the vibrations of feet in contact with the
ground foreran the one who approached.  white fang heard it first, and he
was bristling with recognition while grey beaver still nodded stupidly.
white fang tried to draw the thong softly out of his master's hand; but
the relaxed fingers closed tightly and grey beaver roused himself.

beauty smith strode into camp and stood over white fang.  he snarled
softly up at the thing of fear, watching keenly the deportment of the
hands.  one hand extended outward and began to descend upon his head.  his
soft snarl grew tense and harsh.  the hand continued slowly to descend,
while he crouched beneath it, eyeing it malignantly, his snarl growing
shorter and shorter as, with quickening breath, it approached its
culmination.  suddenly he snapped, striking with his fangs like a snake.
the hand was jer
 
 ___________________________
 
ked back, and the teeth came together emptily with a
sharp click.  beauty smith was frightened and angry.  grey beaver clouted
white fang alongside the head, so that he cowered down close to the earth
in respectful obedience.

white fang's suspicious eyes followed every movement.  he saw beauty
smith go away and return with a stout club.  then the end of the thong
was given over to him by grey beaver.  beauty smith started to walk away.
the thong grew taut.  white fang resisted it.  grey beaver clouted him
right and left to make him get up and follow.  he obeyed, but with a
rush, hurling himself upon the stranger who was dragging him away.  beauty
smith did not jump away.  he had been waiting for this.  he swung the
club smartly, stopping the rush midway and smashing white fang down upon
the ground.  grey beaver laughed and nodded approval.  beauty smith
tightened the thong again, and white fang crawled l
 
 ___________________________
 
imply and dizzily to
his feet.

he did not rush a second time.  one smash from the club was sufficient to
convince him that the white god knew how to handle it, and he was too
wise to fight the inevitable.  so he followed morosely at beauty smith's
heels, his tail between his legs, yet snarling softly under his breath.
but beauty smith kept a wary eye on him, and the club was held always
ready to strike.

at the fort beauty smith left him securely tied and went in to bed.  white
fang waited an hour.  then he applied his teeth to the thong, and in the
space of ten seconds was free.  he had wasted no time with his teeth.
there had been no useless gnawing.  the thong was cut across, diagonally,
almost as clean as though done by a knife.  white fang looked up at the
fort, at the same time bristling and growling.  then he turned and
trotted back to grey beaver's camp.  he owed no allegiance to this
strange and terrible god. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 he had given himself to grey beaver, and to
grey beaver he considered he still belonged.

but what had occurred before was repeated--with a difference.  grey
beaver again made him fast with a thong, and in the morning turned him
over to beauty smith.  and here was where the difference came in.  beauty
smith gave him a beating.  tied securely, white fang could only rage
futilely and endure the punishment.  club and whip were both used upon
him, and he experienced the worst beating he had ever received in his
life.  even the big beating given him in his puppyhood by grey beaver was
mild compared with this.

beauty smith enjoyed the task.  he delighted in it.  he gloated over his
victim, and his eyes flamed dully, as he swung the whip or club
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
listened to white fang's cries of pain and to his helpless bellows and
snarls.  for beauty smith was cruel in the way that cowards are cruel.
cringing and snivelling himself before the blows or angry speech of a
man, he revenged himself, in turn, upon creatures weaker than he.  all
life likes power, and beauty smith was no exception.  denied the
expression of power amongst his own kind, he fell back upon the lesser
creatures and there vindicated the life that was in him.  but beauty
smith had not created himself, and no blame was to be attached to him.  he
had come into the world with a twisted body and a brute intelligence.
this had constituted the clay of him, and it had not been kindly moulded
by the world.

white fang knew why he was being beaten.  when grey beaver tied the thong
around his neck, and p
 
 ___________________________
 
assed the end of the thong into beauty smith's
keeping, white fang knew that it was his god's will for him to go with
beauty smith.  and when beauty smith left him tied outside the fort, he
knew that it was beauty smith's will that he should remain there.
therefore, he had disobeyed the will of both the gods, and earned the
consequent punishment.  he had seen dogs change owners in the past, and
he had seen the runaways beaten as he was being beaten.  he was wise, and
yet in the nature of him there were forces greater than wisdom.  one of
these was fidelity.  he did not love grey beaver, yet, even in the face
of his will and his anger, he was faithful to him.  he could not help it.
this faithfulness was a quali
 
 ___________________________
 
ty of the clay that composed him.  it was
the quality that was peculiarly the possession of his kind; the quality
that set apart his species from all other species; the quality that has
enabled the wolf and the wild dog to come in from the open and be the
companions of man.

after the beating, white fang was dragged back to the fort.  but this
time beauty smith left him tied with a stick.  one does not give up a god
easily, and so with white fang.  grey beaver was his own particular god,
and, in spite of grey beaver's will, white fang still clung to him and
would not give him up.  grey beaver had betrayed and forsaken him, but
that had no effect upon him.  not for nothing had he surrendered himself
body and soul to grey beaver.  there had been no reservation on white
fang's part, and the bond was not to be broken easily.

so, in the night, when the me
 
 ___________________________
 
 the stick.  this was something that dogs were not
supposed to do.  it was unprecedented.  but white fang did it, trotting
away from the fort in the early morning, with the end of the stick
hanging to his neck.

he was wise.  but had he been merely wise he would not have gone back to
grey beaver who had already twice betrayed him.  but there was his
faithfulness, and he went back to be betrayed yet a third time.  again he
yielded to the tying of a thong around his neck by grey beaver, and again
beauty smith came to claim him.  and this time he was beaten even more
severely than before.

grey beaver looked on stolidly while the white man wielded the whip.  he
gave no protection.  it was no longer his dog.  when the beating was over
white fang was sick.  a soft southland dog would have died under it, but
not he.  his school of life had been sterner, and he was himself of
sterner stuff.  he had too great vitality.  his clutch on life was too
strong.  but he was very sick.  at first he was unable to d
 
 ___________________________
 
rag himself
along, and beauty smith had to wait half-an-hour for him.  and then,
blind and reeling, he followed at beauty smith's heels back to the fort.

but now he was tied with a chain that defied his teeth, and he strove in
vain, by lunging, to draw the staple from the timber into which it was
driven.  after a few days, sober and bankrupt, grey beaver departed up
the porcupine on his long journey to the mackenzie.  white fang remained
on the yukon, the property of a man more than half mad and all brute.  but
what is a dog to know in its consciousness of madness?  to white fang,
beauty smith was a veritable, if terri
 
 ___________________________
 
ble, god.  he was a mad god at
best, but white fang knew nothing of madness; he knew only that he must
submit to the will of this new master, obey his every whim and fancy.



chapter iii--the reign of hate


under the tutelage of the mad god, white fang became a fiend.  he was
kept chained in a pen at the rear of the fort, and here beauty smith
teased and irritated and drove him wild with petty torments.  the man
early discovered white fang's susceptibility to laughter, and made it a
point after painfully tricking him, to laugh at him.  this laughter was
uproarious and scornful, and at the same time the god pointed his finger
derisively at white fang.  at such times reason fled from white fang, and
in his transports of rage he was even more mad than beauty smith.

formerly, white fang had been merely the enemy of his kind, withal a
fe
 
 ___________________________
 
rocious enemy.  he now became the enemy of all things, and more
ferocious than ever.  to such an extent was he tormented, that he hated
blindly and without the faintest spark of reason.  he hated the chain
that bound him, the men who peered in at him through the slats of the
pen, the dogs that accompanied the men and that snarled malignantly at
him in his helplessness.  he hated the very wood of the pen that confined
him.  and, first, last, and most of all, he hated beauty smith.

but beauty smith had a purpose in all that he did to white fang.  one day
a number of men gathered about the pen.  beauty smith entered, club in
hand, and took the chain off from white fang's neck.  when his master had
gone out, white fang turned loose and tore around the pen, trying to get
at the men outside.  he was magnificently terrible.  fully five feet in
length, and standing two and one-half feet at the shoulder, he far
outweighed a wolf of corresponding size.  from his mother he had
inherited the heavie
 
 ___________________________
 
ce aspect of the intruder did not deter him.  here was some thing,
not wood nor iron, upon which to wreak his hate.  he leaped in with a
flash of fangs that ripped down the side of the mastiff's neck.  the
mastiff shook his head, growled hoarsely, and plunged at white fang.  but
white fang was here, there, and everywhere, always evading and eluding,
and always leaping in and slashing with his fangs and leaping out again
in time to escape punishment.

the men outside shouted and applauded, while beauty smith, in an ecstasy
of delight, gloated over the ripping and mangling performed by white
fang.  there was no hope for the mastiff from the first.  he was too
ponderous and slow.  in the end, while beauty smith beat white fang back
with a club, the mastiff was dragged out by its owner.  then there was a
payment of bets, and money clinked in beauty smith's hand.

white fang came to look forward eagerly to the gathering of the men
around his pen.  it meant a fight; and this was the only way that was no
 
 ___________________________
 
w
vouchsafed him of expressing the life that was in him.  tormented,
incited to hate, he was kept a prisoner so that there was no way of
satisfying that hate except at the times his master saw fit to put
another dog against him.  beauty smith had estimated his powers well, for
he was invariably the victor.  one day, three dogs were turned in upon
him in succession.  another day a full-grown wolf, fresh-caught from the
wild, was shoved in through the door of the pen.  and on still another
day two dogs were set against him at the same time.  this was his
severest fight, and though in the end he killed them both he was himself
half killed in doing it.

in the fall of the year, when the first snows were falling and mush-ice
was running 
 
 ___________________________
 
in the river, beauty smith took passage for himself and white
fang on a steamboat bound up the yukon to dawson.  white fang had now
achieved a reputation in the land.  as "the fighting wolf" he was known
far and wide, and the cage in which he was kept on the steam-boat's deck
was usually surrounded by curious men.  he raged and snarled at them, or
lay quietly and studied them with cold hatred.  why should he not hate
them?  he never asked himself the question.  he knew only hate and lost
himself in the passion of it.  li
 
 ___________________________
 
he hands of
men.  and yet it was in precisely this way that he was treated.  men
stared at him, poked sticks between the bars to make him snarl, and then
laughed at him.

they were his environment, these men, and they were moulding the clay of
him into a more ferocious thing than had been intended by nature.
nevertheless, nature had given him plasticity.  where many another animal
would have died or had its spirit broken, he adjusted himself and lived,
and at no expense of the spirit.  possibly beauty smith, arch-fiend and
tormentor, was capable of breaking white fang's spirit, but as yet there
were no signs of his succeeding.

if beauty smith had in him a devil, white fang had another; and the two
of them raged against each other unceasingly.  in the days before, white
fang had had the wisdom to cower down and submit to a man with a club in
his hand; but this wisdom now left him.  the mere sight of beauty smith
was sufficient to send him into transports of fury.  and when they came
to close quart
 
 ___________________________
 
ers, and he had been beaten back by the club, he went on
growling and snarling, and showing his fangs.  the last growl could never
be extracted from him.  no matter how terribly he was beaten, he had
always another growl; and when beauty smith gave up and withdrew, the
defiant growl followed after him, or white fang sprang at the bars of the
cage bellowing his hatred.

when the steamboat arrived at dawson, white fang went ashore.  but he
still lived a public life, in a cage, surrounded by curious men.  he was
exhibited as "the fighting wolf," and men paid fifty cents in gold dust
to see him.  he was given no rest.  did he lie down to sleep, he was
stirred up by a sharp stick--so that the audience might get its money's
worth.  in orde
 
 ___________________________
 
ther dog went through its preliminaries, was good and ready, and even
made the first attack.

but greatest of all the advantages in white fang's favour, was his
experience.  he knew more about fighting than did any of the dogs that
faced him.  he had fought more fights, knew how to meet more tricks and
methods, and had more tricks himself, while his own method was scarcely
to be improved upon.

as the time went by, he had fewer and fewer fights.  men despaired of
matching him with an equal, and beauty smith was compelled to pit wolves
against him.  these were trapped by the indians for the purpose, and a
fight between white fang and a wolf was always sure to draw a crowd.
once, a full-grown female lynx was secured, and this time white fang
fought for his life.  her quickness matched his; her ferocity equalled
his; while he fought with his fangs alone, and she fought with her sharp-
clawed feet as well.

but after the lynx, all fighting ceased for white fang.  there were no
more animals with which 
 
 ___________________________
 
to fight--at least, there was none considered
worthy of fighting with him.  so he remained on exhibition until spring,
when one tim keenan, a faro-dealer, arrived in the land.  with him came
the first bull-dog that had ever entered the klondike.  that this dog and
white fang should come together was inevitable, and for a week the
anticipated fight was the mainspring of conversation in certain quarters
of the town.



chapter iv--the clinging death


beauty smith slipped the chain from his neck and stepped back.

for once white fang did not make an immediate attack.  he stood still,
ears pricked forward, alert and curious, surveying the strange animal
that faced him.  he had never seen such a dog before.  tim keenan shoved
the bull-dog forward with a muttered "go to it."  the animal waddled
toward the centre of the circle, short and squat and ungainly.  he came
to a stop and blinked across at white fang.

there were cries from the crowd of, "go to him, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ting more of the loose skin and fur in his
mouth.  the result was that he was slowly throttling white fang.  the
latter's breath was drawn with greater and greater difficulty as the
moments went by.

it began to look as though the battle were over.  the backers of cherokee
waxed jubilant and offered ridiculous odds.  white fang's backers were
correspondingly depressed, and refused bets of ten to one and twenty to
one, though one man was rash enough to close a wager of fifty to one.
this man was beauty smith.  he took a step into the ring and pointed his
finger at white fang.  then he began to laugh derisively and scornfully.
this produced the desired effect.  white fang went wild with rage.  he
called up his reserves of strength, and gained his feet.  as he struggled
around the ring, the fifty pounds of his foe ever dragging on his throat,
his anger passed on into panic.  the basic life of him dominated him
again, and his intelligence fled before the will of his flesh to live.
round and round and 
 
 ___________________________
 
modically and to no purpose.  he could get little air, and that
little grew less and less under the merciless grip that ever tightened.
in spite of his armour of fur, the great vein of his throat would have
long since been torn open, had not the first grip of the bull-dog been so
low down as to be practically on the chest.  it had taken cherokee a long
time to shift that grip upward, and this had also tended further to clog
his jaws with fur and skin-fold.

in the meantime, the abysmal brute in beauty smith had been rising into
his brain and mastering the small bit of sanity that he possessed at
best.  when he saw white fang's eyes beginning to glaze, he knew beyond
doubt that the fight was lost.  then he broke loose.  he sprang upon
white fang and began savagely to kick him.  there were hisses from the
crowd and cries of protest, but that was all.  while this went on, and
beauty smith continued to kick white fang, there was a commotion in the
crowd.  the tall young newcomer was forcing his way th
 
 ___________________________
 
rough, shouldering
men right and left without ceremony or gentleness.  when he broke through
into the ring, beauty smith was just in the act of delivering another
kick.  all his weight was on one foot, and he was in a state of unstable
equilibrium.  at that moment the newcomer's fist landed a smashing blow
full in his face.  beauty smith's remaining leg left the ground, and his
whole body seemed to lift into the air as he turned over backward and
struck the snow.  the newcomer turned upon the crowd.

"you cowards!" he cried.  "you beasts!"

he was in a rage himself--a sane rage.  his grey eyes seemed metallic and
steel-like as they flashed upon the crowd.  beauty smith regained his
feet and came toward him, sniffling and cowardly.  the new-comer did not
understand.  he did not know how abject a coward the other was, and
thought
 
 ___________________________
 
 he was coming back intent on fighting.  so, with a "you beast!"
he smashed beauty smith over backward with a second blow in the face.
beauty smith decided that the snow was the safest place for him, and lay
where he had fallen, making no effort to get up.

"come on, matt, lend a hand," the newcomer called the dog-musher, who had
followed him into the ring.

both men bent over the dogs.  matt took hold of white fang, ready to pull
when cherokee's jaws should be loosened.  this the younger man
endeavoured to accomplish by clutching the bulldog's jaws in his hands
and trying to spread them.  it was a vain undertaking.  as he pulled and
tugge
 
 ___________________________
 

into the crowd.

white fang made several ineffectual efforts to get up.  once he gained
his feet, but his legs were too weak to sustain him, and he slowly wilted
and sank back into the snow.  his eyes were half closed, and the surface
of them was glassy.  his jaws were apart, and through them the tongue
protruded, draggled and limp.  to all appearances he looked like a dog
that had been strangled to death.  matt examined him.

"just about all in," he announced; "but he's breathin' all right."

beauty smith had regained his feet and come over to look at white fang.

"matt, how much is a good sled-dog worth?" scott asked.

the dog-musher, still on his knees and stooped over white fang,
calculated for a moment.

"three hundred dollars," he answered.

"and how much for one that's all chewed up like this one?" scott asked,
nudging white fang with his foot.

"half of that," was the dog-musher's judgment.  scott turned upon beauty
smith.

"did you hear, mr. beast?  i'm going to take your dog from you, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd i'm
going to give you a hundred and fifty for him."

he opened his pocket-book and counted out the bills.

beauty smith put his hands behind his back, refusing to touch the
proffered money.

"i ain't a-sellin'," he said.

"oh, yes you are," the other assured him.  "because i'm buying.  here's
your money.  the dog's mine."

beauty smith, his hands still behind him, began to back away.

scott sprang toward him, drawing his fist back to strike.  beauty smith
cowered down in anticipation of the blow.

"i've got my rights," he whimpered.

"you've forfeited your rights to own that dog," was the rejoinder.  "are
you going to take the money? or do i have to hit you again?"

"all right," beauty smith spoke up with the alacrity of fear.  "but i
take the money under protest," he added.  "the dog's a mint.  i ain't a-
goin' to be robbed.  a man's got his rights."

"correct," scott answered, passing the money over to him.  "a man's got
his rights.  but you'r
 
 ___________________________
 
e not a man.  you're a beast."

"wait till i get back to dawson," beauty smith threatened.  "i'll have
the law on you."

"if you open your mouth when you get back to dawson, i'll have you run
out of town.  understand?"

beauty smith replied with a grunt.

"understand?" the other thundered with abrupt fierceness.

"yes," beauty smith grunted, shrinking away.

"yes what?"

"yes, sir," beauty smith snarled.

"look out!  he'll bite!" some one shouted, and a guffaw of laughter went
up.

scott turned his back on him, and returned to help the dog-musher, who
was working over white fang.

some of the men were already departing; others stood in groups, looking
on and talking.  tim keenan joined one of the groups.

"who's that mug?" he asked.

"weedon scott," some one answered.

"and who in hell is weedon scott?" the faro-dealer demanded.

"oh, one of them crackerjack minin' experts.  he's in wi
 
 ___________________________
 
e dog-musher paused and nodded his head confidentially at moosehide
mountain.

"well, don't be a miser with what you know," scott said sharply, after
waiting a suitable length of time.  "spit it out.  what is it?"

the dog-musher indicated white fang with a backward thrust of his thumb.

"wolf or dog, it's all the same--he's ben tamed 'ready."

"no!"

"i tell you yes, an' broke to harness.  look close there.  d'ye see them
marks across the chest?"

"you're right, matt.  he was a sled-dog before beauty smith got hold of
him."

"and there's not much reason against his bein' a sled-dog again."

"what d'ye think?" scott queried eagerly.  then the hope died down as he
added, shaking his head, "we've had him two weeks now, and if anything
he's wilder than ever at the present moment."

"give 'm a chance," matt counselled.  "turn 'm loose for a spell."

the other looked at him incredulously.

"yes," matt went on, "i know you've tried to, but you didn't take a
club."

"you try it then."

the dog-musher sec
 
 ___________________________
 
t dast tackle me so long as i got that club handy.  he's
not clean crazy, sure."

as the man's hand approached his neck, white fang bristled and snarled
and crouched down.  but while he eyed the approaching hand, he at the
same time contrived to keep track of the club in the other hand,
suspended threateningly above him.  matt unsnapped the chain from the
collar and stepped back.

white fang could scarcely realise that he was free.  many months had gone
by since he passed into the possession of beauty smith, and in all that
period he had never known a moment of freedom except at the times he had
been loosed to fight with other dogs.  immediately after such fights he
had always been imprisoned again.

he did not know what to make of it.  perhaps some new devilry of the gods
was about to be perpetrated on him.  he walked slowly and cautiously,
prepared to be assailed at any moment.  he did not know what to do, it
was all so unprecedented.  he took the precaution to sheer off from the
two watching go
 
 ___________________________
 
uick enough to avoid any snap or
slash.  but he had yet to learn the remarkable quickness of white fang,
who struck with the certainty and swiftness of a coiled snake.

scott cried out sharply with surprise, catching his torn hand and holding
it tightly in his other hand.  matt uttered a great oath and sprang to
his side.  white fang crouched down, and backed away, bristling, showing
his fangs, his eyes malignant with menace.  now he could expect a beating
as fearful as any he had received from beauty smith.

"here!  what are you doing?" scott cried suddenly.

matt had dashed into the cabin and come out with a rifle.

"nothin'," he said slowly, with a careless calmness that was assumed,
"only goin' to keep that promise i made.  i reckon it's up to me to kill
'm as i said i'd do."

"no you don't!"

"yes i do.  watch me."

as matt had pleaded for white fang when he had been bitten, it was now
weedon scott's turn to plead.

"you said to give him a chance.  well, give it to him.  we've only just
start
 
 ___________________________
 
 with kindness touched
to life potencies that had languished and well-nigh perished.  one such
potency was _love_.  it took the place of _like_, which latter had been
the highest feeling that thrilled him in his intercourse with the gods.

but this love did not come in a day.  it began with _like_ and out of it
slowly developed.  white fang did not run away, though he was allowed to
remain loose, because he liked this new god.  this was certainly better
than the life he had lived in the cage of beauty smith, and it was
necessary that he should have some god.  the lordship of man was a need
of his nature.  the seal of his dependence on man had been set upon him
in that early day when he turned his back on the wild and crawled to grey
beaver's feet to receive the expected beating.  this seal had been
stamped upon him again, and ineradicably, on his second return from the
wild, when the long famine was over and there was fish once more in the
village of grey beaver.

and so, because he needed a god a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd because he preferred weedon scott to
beauty smith, white fang remained.  in acknowledgment of fealty, he
proceeded to take upon himself the guardianship of his master's property.
he prowled about the cabin while the sled-dogs slept, and the first night-
visitor to the cabin fought him off with a club until weedon scott came
to the rescue.  but white fang soon learned to differentiate between
thieves and honest men, to appraise the true value of step and carriage.
the man who travelled, loud-stepping, the direct line to the cabin door,
he let a
 
 ___________________________
 
 for himself, and matt backed his judgment with
strong language after the experiment had been tried.  but, though he
worked in the sled in the day, white fang did not forego the guarding of
his master's property in the night.  thus he was on duty all the time,
ever vigilant and faithful, the most valuable of all the dogs.

"makin' free to spit out what's in me," matt said one day, "i beg to
state that you was a wise guy all right when you paid the price you did
for that dog.  you clean swindled beauty smith on top of pushin' his face
in with your fist."

a recrudescence of anger glinted in weedon scott's grey eyes, and he
muttered savagely, "the beast!"

in the late spring a great trouble came to white fang.  without warning,
the love-master disappeared.  there had been warning, but white fang was
unversed in such things and did not understand the packing of a grip.  he
remembered afterwards that his packing had preceded the master's
disappearance; but at the time he suspected nothing.  that night
 
 ___________________________
 
sleeve, blue flannel shirt and undershirt were
ripped in rags, while the arms themselves were terribly slashed and
streaming blood.

all this the two men saw in the first instant.  the next instant weedon
scott had white fang by the throat and was dragging him clear.  white
fang struggled and snarled, but made no attempt to bite, while he quickly
quieted down at a sharp word from the master.

matt helped the man to his feet.  as he arose he lowered his crossed
arms, exposing the bestial face of beauty smith.  the dog-musher let go
of him precipitately, with action similar to that of a man who has picked
up live fire.  beauty smith blinked in the lamplight and looked about
him.  he caught sight of white fang and terror rushed into his face.

at the same moment matt noticed two objects lying in the snow.  he held
the lamp close to them, indicating them with his toe for his employer's
benefit--a steel dog-chain and a stout club.

weedon scott saw and nodded.  not a word was spoken.  the dog-musher la
 
 ___________________________
 
id
his hand on beauty smith's shoulder and faced him to the right about.  no
word needed to be spoken.  beauty smith started.

in the meantime the love-master was patting white fang and talking to
him.

"tried to steal you, eh?  and you wouldn't have it!  well, well, he made
a mistake, didn't he?"

"must 'a' thought he had hold of seventeen devils," the dog-musher
sniggered.

white fang, still wrought up and bristling, growled and growled, the hair
slowly lying down, the crooning note remote and dim, but growing in his
throat.




part v


chapter i--the long trail


it was in the air.  white fang sensed the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 determined conduct; yet he did not know the speech of the
gods, nor was there any way for him to learn save by experience.  he
obeyed his natural impulses until they ran him counter to some law.  when
this had been done a few times, he learned the law and after that
observed it.

but most potent in his education was the cuff of the master's hand, the
censure of the master's voice.  because of white fang's very great love,
a cuff from the master hurt him far more than any beating grey beaver or
beauty smith had ever given him.  they had hurt only the flesh of him;
beneath the flesh the spirit had still raged, splendid and invincible.
but with the master the cuff was always too light to hurt the flesh.  yet
it went deeper.  it was an expression of the master's disapproval, and
white fang's spirit wilted under it.

in point of fact, the cuff was rarely administered.  the master's voice
was sufficient.  by it white fang knew whether he did right or not.  by
it he trimmed his conduct and adjusted his 
 
 ___________________________
 
er dogs.  he knew the law
even better than did the dogs that had known no other life, and he
observed the law more punctiliously; but still there was about him a
suggestion of lurking ferocity, as though the wild still lingered in him
and the wolf in him merely slept.

he never chummed with other dogs.  lonely he had lived, so far as his
kind was concerned, and lonely he would continue to live.  in his
puppyhood, under the persecution of lip-lip and the puppy-pack, and in
his fighting days with beauty smith, he had acquired a fixed aversion for
dogs.  the natural course of his life had been diverted, and, recoiling
from his kind, he had clung to the human.

besides, all southland dogs looked upon him with suspicion.  he aroused
in them their instinctive fear of the wild, and they greeted him always
with snarl and growl and belligerent hatred.  he, on the other hand,
learned that it was not necessary to use his teeth upon them.  his naked
fangs and writhing lips were uniformly efficacious, rarely f
 
 ___________________________
 
 kiche, crept trembling to the knees
of grey beaver to tender his allegiance, ran for his life before lip-lip
and all the howling bedlam of the puppy-pack.

he ran again through the silence, hunting his living food through the
months of famine; and again he ran at the head of the team, the gut-whips
of mit-sah and grey beaver snapping behind, their voices crying "ra!
raa!" when they came to a narrow passage and the team closed together
like a fan to go through.  he lived again all his days with beauty smith
and the fights he had fought.  at such times he whimpered and snarled in
his sleep, and they that looked on said that his dreams were bad.

but there was one particular nightmare from which he suffered--the
clanking, clanging monsters of electric cars that were to him colossal
screaming lynxes.  he would lie in a screen of bushes, watching for a
squirrel to venture far enough out on the ground from its tree-refuge.
then, when he sprang out upon it, it would transform itself into an
electric car
 
 ___________________________
 
, menacing and terrible, towering over him like a mountain,
screaming and clanging and spitting fire at him.  it was the same when he
challenged the hawk down out of the sky.  down out of the blue it would
rush, as it dropped upon him changing itself into the ubiquitous electric
car.  or again, he would be in the pen of beauty smith.  outside the pen,
men would be gathering, and he knew that a fight was on.  he watched the
door for his antagonist to enter.  the door would open, and thrust in
upon him would come the awful electric car.  a thousand times this
occurred, and each time the terror it inspired was as vivid and great as
ever.

then came the day when the last bandage and the last plaster cast were
taken off.  it was a gala day.  all sierra vista was gathered around.  the
master rubbed his ears, and he crooned his l