heep were first herded and guarded by some dim
ancestor of hers.  and so, as he abandoned his rush at her and braced
himself to avoid the contact, she sprang upon him.  he snarled
involuntarily as he felt her teeth in his shoulder, but beyond this made
no offer to hurt her.  he backed away, stiff-legged with
self-consciousness, and tried to go around her.  he dodged this way and
that, and curved and turned, but to no purpose.  she remained always
between him and the way he wanted to go.

"here, collie!" called the strange man in the carriage.

weedon scott laughed.

"never mind, father.  it is good discipline.  white fang will have to
learn many things, and it's just as well that he begins now.  he'll
adjust himself all right."

the carriage drove on, and still collie blocked white fang's way.  he
tried to outrun her by leaving the drive and circling across the lawn but
she ran on the inner and smaller circle, and was always there, facing him
with her two rows of gleaming teeth.  back he cir
 
 ___________________________
 
hing upon him.  white fang tried
to face it.  but he was going too fast, and the hound was too close.  it
struck him on the side; and such was his forward momentum and the
unexpectedness of it, white fang was hurled to the ground and rolled
clear over.  he came out of the tangle a spectacle of malignancy, ears
flattened back, lips writhing, nose wrinkling, his teeth clipping
together as the fangs barely missed the hound's soft throat.

the master was running up, but was too far away; and it was collie that
saved the hound's life.  before white fang could spring in and deliver
the fatal stroke, and just as he was in the act of springing in, collie
arrived.  she had been out-manoeuvred and out-run, to say nothing of her
having been unceremoniously tumbled in the gravel, and her arrival was
like that of a tornado--made up of offended dignity, justifiable wrath,
and instinctive hatred for this marauder from the wild.  she struck white
fang at right angles in the midst of his spring, and again he
 
 ___________________________
 
ed to come of it, while the noises the gods made were
certainly not threatening.  these gods also made overtures to white fang,
but he warned them off with a snarl, and the master did likewise with
word of mouth.  at such times white fang leaned in close against the
master's legs and received reassuring pats on the head.

the hound, under the command, "dick!  lie down, sir!" had gone up the
steps and lain down to one side of the porch, still growling and keeping
a sullen watch on the intruder.  collie had been taken in charge by one
of the woman-gods, who held arms around her neck and petted and caressed
her; but collie was very much perplexed and worried, whining and
restless, outraged by the permitted presence of this wolf and confident
that the gods were making a mistake.

all the gods started up the steps to enter the house.  white fang
followed closely at the master's heels.  dick, on the porch, growled, and
white fang, on the steps, bristled and growled back.

"take collie inside and l
 
 ___________________________
 
.  his whole life he had kept aloof from his kind, and he still
desired to keep aloof.  dick's overtures bothered him, so he snarled dick
away.  in the north he had learned the lesson that he must let the
master's dogs alone, and he did not forget that lesson now.  but he
insisted on his own privacy and self-seclusion, and so thoroughly ignored
dick that that good-natured creature finally gave him up and scarcely
took as much interest in him as in the hitching-post near the stable.

not so with collie.  while she accepted him because it was the mandate of
the gods, that was no reason that she should leave him in peace.  woven
into her being was the memory of countless crimes he and his had
perpetrated against her ancestry.  not in a day nor a generation were the
ravaged sheepfolds to be forgotten.  all this was a spur to her, pricking
her to retaliation.  she could not fly in the face of the gods who
permitted him, but that did not prevent her from making life miserable
for him in petty ways
 
 ___________________________
 
.  a feud, ages old, was between them, and she, for
one, would see to it that he was reminded.

so collie took advantage of her sex to pick upon white fang and maltreat
him.  his instinct would not permit him to attack her, while her
persistence would not permit him to ignore her.  when she rushed at him
he turned his fur-protected shoulder to her sharp teeth and walked away
stiff-legged and stately.  when she forced him too hard, he was compelled
to go about in a circle, his shoulder presented to her, his head turned
from her, and on his face and in his eyes a patient and bored expression.
sometim
 
 ___________________________
 
 cut
in his forward rush, and as he leaped for the throat the groom cried out,
"my god!" and staggered backward.  he dropped the whip and shielded his
throat with his arms.  in consequence, his forearm was ripped open to the
bone.

the man was badly frightened.  it was not so much white fang's ferocity
as it was his silence that unnerved the groom.  still protecting his
throat and face with his torn and bleeding arm, he tried to retreat to
the barn.  and it would have gone hard with him had not collie appeared
on the scene.  as she had saved dick's life, she now saved the groom's.
she rushed upon white fang in frenzied wrath.  she had been right.  she
had known better than the blundering gods.  all her suspicions were
justified.  here was the ancient marauder up to his old tricks again.

the groom escaped into the stables, and white fang backed away before
collie's wicked teeth, or presented his shoulder to them and circled
round and round.  but collie did not give over, as was her wont, aft
 
 ___________________________
 
from his kind, he had clung to the human.

besides, all southland dogs looked upon him with suspicion.  he aroused
in them their instinctive fear of the wild, and they greeted him always
with snarl and growl and belligerent hatred.  he, on the other hand,
learned that it was not necessary to use his teeth upon them.  his naked
fangs and writhing lips were uniformly efficacious, rarely failing to
send a bellowing on-rushing dog back on its haunches.

but there was one trial in white fang's life--collie.  she never gave him
a moment's peace.  she was not so amenable to the law as he.  she defied
all efforts of the master to make her become friends with white fang.
ever in his ears was sounding her sharp and nervous snarl.  she had never
forgiven him the chicken-killing episode, and persistently held to the
belief that his intentions were bad.  she found him guilty before the
act, and treated him accordingly.  she became a pest to him, like a
policeman following him around the stable and the ho
 
 ___________________________
 
unds, and, if he even
so much as glanced curiously at a pigeon or chicken, bursting into an
outcry of indignation and wrath.  his favourite way of ignoring her was
to lie down, with his head on his fore-paws, and pretend sleep.  this
always dumfounded and silenced her.

with the exception of collie, all things went well with white fang.  he
had learned control and poise, and he knew the law.  he achieved a
staidness, and calmness, and philosophic tolerance.  he no longer lived
in a hostile environment.  danger and hurt and death did not lurk
everywhere about him.  in time, the unknown, as a thing of terror and
menace ever impending, faded away.  life was soft and easy.  it flowed
along smoothly, and neither fear nor foe lurked by the way.

he missed the snow without being aware of it.  "a
 
 ___________________________
 
a people, and even the groom whose arm he had slashed admitted that
he was a wise dog even if he was a wolf.  judge scott still held to the
same opinion, and proved it to everybody's dissatisfaction by
measurements and descriptions taken from the encyclopaedia and various
works on natural history.

the days came and went, streaming their unbroken sunshine over the santa
clara valley.  but as they grew shorter and white fang's second winter in
the southland came on, he made a strange discovery.  collie's teeth were
no longer sharp.  there was a playfulness about her nips and a gentleness
that prevented them from really hurting him.  he forgot that she had made
life a burden to him, and when she disported herself around him he
responded solemnly, striving to be playful and becoming no more than
ridiculous.

one day she led him off on a long chase through the back-pasture land
into the woods.  it was the afternoon that the master was to ride, and
white fang knew it.  the horse stood saddled and
 
 ___________________________
 
 waiting at the door.
white fang hesitated.  but there was that in him deeper than all the law
he had learned, than the customs that had moulded him, than his love for
the master, than the very will to live of himself; and when, in the
moment of his indecision, collie nipped him and scampered off, he turned
and followed after.  the master rode alone that day; and in the woods,
side by side, white fang ran with collie, as his mother, kiche, and old
one eye had run long years before in the silent northland forest.



chapter v--the sleeping wolf


it was about this time that the newspapers were full of the daring escape
of a convict from san quentin prison.  he was a ferocious man.  he had
been ill-made in the making.  he had not been born right, and he had not
been helped any by the moulding he had received at the hands of society.
the hands of society are harsh, and this man was a striking sample of its
han
 
 ___________________________
 
learn to walk again," said the surgeon; "so he might as
well start in right now.  it won't hurt him.  take him outside."

and outside he went, like a king, with all sierra vista about him and
tending on him.  he was very weak, and when he reached the lawn he lay
down and rested for a while.

then the procession started on, little spurts of strength coming into
white fang's muscles as he used them and the blood began to surge through
them.  the stables were reached, and there in the doorway, lay collie, a
half-dozen pudgy puppies playing about her in the sun.

white fang looked on with a wondering eye.  collie snarled warningly at
him, and he was careful to keep his distance.  the master with his toe
helped one sprawling puppy toward him.  he bristled suspiciously, but the
master warned him that all was well.  collie, clasped in the arms of one
of the women, watched him jealously and with a snarl warned him that all
was not well.

the puppy sprawled in front of him.  he cocked his ears and wa
 
 ___________________________
 
tched it
curiously.  then their noses touched, and he felt the warm little tongue
of the puppy on his jowl.  white fang's tongue went out, he knew not why,
and he licked the puppy's face.

hand-clapping and pleased cries from the gods greeted the performance.  he
was surprised, and looked at them in a puzzled way.  then his weakness
asserted itself, and he lay down, his ears cocked, his head on one side,
as he watched the puppy.  the other puppies came sprawling toward him, to
collie's great disgust; and he gravely permitted them to clamber and
tumble over him.  at first, amid the applause of the gods, he betrayed a
trifle of his old self-consciousness and awkwardness.  this passed away
as the puppies' antics and mauling continued, and he lay with half-shut
patient eyes, drowsing in the sun.
