iations. ‘i shall sit here,’ he said, ‘on and off, for
days and days.’

‘but what am i to do?’ said alice.

‘anything you like,’ said the footman, and began whistling.

‘oh, there’s no use in talking to him,’ said alice desperately: ‘he’s
perfectly idiotic!’ and she opened the door and went in.

the door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from
one end to the other: the duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool in
the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire, stirring
a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.

‘there’s certainly too much pepper in that soup!’ alice said to herself,
as well as she could for sneezing.

there was certainly too much of it in the air. even the duchess
sneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling
alternately without a moment’s pause. the only things in the kitchen
that did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting on
the hearth and gri
 
 ___________________________
 
always grinned; in fact, i didn’t know
that cats could grin.’

‘they all can,’ said the duchess; ‘and most of ‘em do.’

‘i don’t know of any that do,’ alice said very politely, feeling quite
pleased to have got into a conversation.

‘you don’t know much,’ said the duchess; ‘and that’s a fact.’

alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would
be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation. while she
was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the
fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at
the duchess and the baby--the fire-irons came first; then followed a
shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes. the duchess took no notice of
them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already,
that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

‘oh, please mind what you’re doing!’ cried alice, jumping up and down in
an agony of terror. ‘oh, there g
 
 ___________________________
 
ed their own business,’ the duchess said in a hoarse
growl, ‘the world would go round a deal faster than it does.’

‘which would not be an advantage,’ said alice, who felt very glad to get
an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. ‘just think of
what work it would make with the day and night! you see the earth takes
twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis--’

‘talking of axes,’ said the duchess, ‘chop off her head!’

alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take
the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to
be listening, so she went on again: ‘twenty-four hours, i think; or is
it twelve? i--’

‘oh, don’t bother me,’ said the duchess; ‘i never could abide figures!’
and with that she began nursing her child again, singing a sort of
lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at the end of
every line:

   ‘speak roughly to your little boy,
    and beat him when he sneezes
 
 ___________________________
 
:
   he only does it to annoy,
    because he knows it teases.’

         chorus.

 (in which the cook and the baby joined):--

       ‘wow! wow! wow!’

while the duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing
the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so,
that alice could hardly hear the words:--

   ‘i speak severely to my boy,
    i beat him when he sneezes;
   for he can thoroughly enjoy
    the pepper when he pleases!’

         chorus.

       ‘wow! wow! wow!’

‘here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!’ the duchess said to alice,
flingin
 
 ___________________________
 
g the baby at her as she spoke. ‘i must go and get ready to play
croquet with the queen,’ and she hurried out of the room. the cook threw
a frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.

alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped
little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, ‘just
like a star-fish,’ thought alice. the poor little thing was snorting
like a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and
straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minute
or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.

as soon as she h
 
 ___________________________
 
’

‘i couldn’t help it,’ said five, in a sulky tone; ‘seven jogged my
elbow.’

on which seven looked up and said, ‘that’s right, five! always lay the
blame on others!’

‘you’d better not talk!’ said five. ‘i heard the queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!’

‘what for?’ said the one who had spoken first.

‘that’s none of your business, two!’ said seven.

‘yes, it is his business!’ said five, ‘and i’ll tell him--it was for
bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.’

seven flung down his brush, and had just begun ‘well, of all the unjust
things--’ when his eye chanced to fall upon alice, as she stood watching
them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and
all of them bowed low.

‘would you tell me,’ said alice, a little timidly, ‘why you are painting
those roses?’

five and seven said nothing, but looked at two. two began in a low
voice, ‘why the fact is, you see, miss, this here oug
 
 ___________________________
 
et
on better.’

‘i’d rather finish my tea,’ said the hatter, with an anxious look at the
queen, who was reading the list of singers.

‘you may go,’ said the king, and the hatter hurriedly left the court,
without even waiting to put his shoes on.

‘--and just take his head off outside,’ the queen added to one of the
officers: but the hatter was out of sight before the officer could get
to the door.

‘call the next witness!’ said the king.

the next witness was the duchess’s cook. she carried the pepper-box in
her hand, and alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the
court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.

‘give your evidence,’ said the king.

‘shan’t,’ said the cook.

the king looked anxiously at the white rabbit, who said in a low voice,
‘your majesty must cross-examine this witness.’

‘well, if i must, i must,’ the king said, with a melancholy air, and,
after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till h
 
 ___________________________
 
is eyes were
nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, ‘what are tarts made of?’

‘pepper, mostly,’ said the cook.

‘treacle,’ said a sleepy voice behind her.

‘collar that dormouse,’ the queen shrieked out. ‘behead that dormouse!
turn that dormouse out of court! suppress him! pinch him! off with his
whiskers!’

for some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the dormouse
turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had
disappeared.

‘never mind!’ said the king, with an air of great relief. ‘call the next
witness.’ and he added in an undertone to the queen, ‘really, my dear,
you must cross-examine the next witness. it quite makes my forehead
ache!’

alice watched the white rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling very
curious to see what the next witness would be like, ‘--for they haven’t
got much evidence yet,’ she said to herself. imagine her surprise, when
the white rabbit read out,