oad
brow. she remembered to have hated her father’s overbearing manner
towards her gentle, humorous, kindly-souled mother. she remembered
running over the breakwater at sheerness and finding the boat. she
remembered to have been petted and flattered by all the men when she had
gone to the dockyard, for she was a delicate, rather proud child. she
remembered the funny old mistress, whose assistant she had become, whom
she had loved to help in the private school. and she still had the bible
that john field had given her. she used to walk home from chapel
with john field when she was nineteen. he was the son of a well-to-do
tradesman, had been to college in london, and was to devote himself to
business.

she could always recall in detail a september sunday afternoon, when
they had sat under the vine at the back of her father’s house. the sun
came through the chinks of the vine-leaves and made beautiful patterns,
like a lace scarf, falling on her and on him. some of the leaves were
clean yellow, 
 
 ___________________________
 
s rather timid before her.

“but my father’s so stiff-necked. he means to put me into the business,
and i know he’ll do it.”

“but if you’re a man?” she had cried.

“being a man isn’t everything,” he replied, frowning with puzzled
helplessness.

now, as she moved about her work at the bottoms, with some experience of
what being a man meant, she knew that it was not everything.

at twenty, owing to her health, she had left sheerness. her father had
retired home to nottingham. john field’s father had been ruined; the
son had gone as a teacher in norwood. she did not hear of him until, two
years later, she made determined inquiry. he had married his landlady, a
woman of forty, a widow with property.

and still mrs. morel preserved john field’s bible. she did not now
believe him to be--well, she understood pretty well what he might or
might not have been. so she preserved his bible, and kept his memory
intact in her heart, for her own sake. to her dying day, for thirty-five
y