 depended on her. for hours he talked to her, when she was well. he
became the god-parent of the child.

occasionally the minister stayed to tea with mrs. morel. then she laid
the cloth early, got out her best cups, with a little green rim, and
hoped morel would not come too soon; indeed, if he stayed for a pint,
she would not mind this day. she had always two dinners to cook, because
she believed children should have their chief meal at midday, whereas
morel needed his at five o’clock. so mr. heaton would hold the baby,
whilst mrs. morel beat up a batter-pudding or peeled the potatoes, and
he, watching her all the time, would discuss his next sermon. his ideas
were quaint and fantastic. she brought him judiciously to earth. it was
a discussion of the wedding at cana.

“when he changed the water into wine at cana,” he said, “that is a
symbol that the ordinary life, even the blood, of the married husband
and wife, which had before been uninspired, like water, became filled
with the spi
 
 ___________________________
 
rried out the steaming saucepan. morel took off his coat,
dragged his armchair to table, and sat down heavily.

“are you tired?” asked the clergyman.

“tired? i ham that,” replied morel. “you don’t know what it is to be
tired, as i’m tired.”

“no,” replied the clergyman.

“why, look yer ‘ere,” said the miner, showing the shoulders of his
singlet. “it’s a bit dry now, but it’s wet as a clout with sweat even
yet. feel it.”

“goodness!” cried mrs. morel. “mr. heaton doesn’t want to feel your
nasty singlet.”

the clergyman put out his hand gingerly.

“no, perhaps he doesn’t,” said morel; “but it’s all come out of me,
whether or not. an’ iv’ry day alike my singlet’s wringin’ wet. ‘aven’t
you got a drink, missis, for a man when he comes home barkled up from
the pit?”

“you know you drank all the beer,” said mrs. morel, pouring out his tea.

“an’ was there no more to be got?” turning to the clergyman--“a man gets
that ca
 
 ___________________________
 
through his
great black moustache, sighing afterwards. then he poured out another
saucerful, and stood his cup on the table.

“my cloth!” said mrs. morel, putting it on a plate.

“a man as comes home as i do ‘s too tired to care about cloths,” said
morel.

“pity!” exclaimed his wife, sarcastically.

the room was full of the smell of meat and vegetables and pit-clothes.

he leaned over to the minister, his great moustache thrust forward, his
mouth very red in his black face.

“mr. heaton,” he said, “a man as has been down the black hole all day,
dingin’ away at a coal-face, yi, a sight harder than that wall--”

“needn’t make a moan of it,” put in mrs. morel.

she hated her husband because, whenever he had an audience, he whined
and played for sympathy. william, sitting nursing the baby, hated him,
with a boy’s hatred for false sentiment, and for the stupid treatment of
his mother. annie had never liked him; she merely avoided him.

when the minister had gone, mr
 
 ___________________________
 
n as he is not understood, or feels
himself held cheap; and, again, is adorable at the first touch of
warmth.

he suffered very much from the first contact with anything. when he was
seven, the starting school had been a nightmare and a torture to him.
but afterwards he liked it. and now that he felt he had to go out into
life, he went through agonies of shrinking self-consciousness. he was
quite a clever painter for a boy of his years, and he knew some french
and german and mathematics that mr. heaton had taught him. but nothing
he had was of any commercial value. he was not strong enough for heavy
manual work, his mother said. he did not care for making things with his
hands, preferred racing about, or making excursions into the country, or
reading, or painting.

“what do you want to be?” his mother asked.

“anything.”

“that is no answer,” said mrs. morel.

but it was quite truthfully the only answer he could give. his ambition,
as far as this world’s gear went, was quietly t