e would not trouble to answer. then:

“walking with louie travers,” she said.

louie was one of the “spiral” girls.

“why, do you know her?” he asked.

she did not answer. he turned to miriam.

“where are you going?” he asked.

“to the castle.”

“what train are you going home by?”

“i am driving with father. i wish you could come too. what time are you
free?”

“you know not till eight to-night, damn it!”

and directly the two women moved on.

paul remembered that clara dawes was the daughter of an old friend of
mrs. leivers. miriam had sought her out because she had once been spiral
overseer at jordan’s, and because her husband, baxter dawes, was smith
for the factory, making the irons for cripple instruments, and so on.
through her miriam felt she got into direct contact with jordan’s, and
could estimate better paul’s position. but mrs. dawes was separated from
her husband, and had taken up women’s rights. she was supposed to be
clever. it interested paul.
 
 ___________________________
 
r lookin’ at, three hap’orth o’ pap?” he snarled.

the boy shrugged his shoulders slightly.

“why yer--!” shouted dawes.

“leave him alone,” said mr. pappleworth, in that insinuating voice which
means, “he’s only one of your good little sops who can’t help it.”

since that time the boy used to look at the man every time he came
through with the same curious criticism, glancing away before he met the
smith’s eye. it made dawes furious. they hated each other in silence.

clara dawes had no children. when she had left her husband the home had
been broken up, and she had gone to live with her mother. dawes lodged
with his sister. in the same house was a sister-in-law, and somehow paul
knew that this girl, louie travers, was now dawes’s woman. she was a
handsome, insolent hussy, who mocked at the youth, and yet flushed if he
walked along to the station with her as she went home.

the next time he went to see miriam it was saturday evening. she had
a fire in the parlour, and
 
 ___________________________
 
er his split with her. there was something else he
wanted. he could not be satisfied; he could give her no peace. there was
between them now always a ground for strife. she wanted to prove him.
she believed that his chief need in life was herself. if she could prove
it, both to herself and to him, the rest might go; she could simply
trust to the future.

so in may she asked him to come to willey farm and meet mrs. dawes.
there was something he hankered after. she saw him, whenever they spoke
of clara dawes, rouse and get slightly angry. he said he did not like
her. yet he was keen to know about her. well, he should put himself to
the test. she believed that there were in him desires for higher things,
and desires for lower, and that the desire for the higher would conquer.
at any rate, he should try. she forgot that her “higher” and “lower”
 were arbitrary.

he was rather excited at the idea of meeting clara at willey farm. mrs.
dawes came for the day. her heavy, dun-coloured hair was coi
 
 ___________________________
 
ther i think.

“i must thank you for your sympathy with my painting and drawing. many a
sketch is dedicated to you. i do look forward to your criticisms, which,
to my shame and glory, are always grand appreciations. it is a lovely
joke, that. au revoir.”


this was the end of the first phase of paul’s love affair. he was now
about twenty-three years old, and, though still virgin, the sex instinct
that miriam had over-refined for so long now grew particularly strong.
often, as he talked to clara dawes, came that thickening and quickening
of his blood, that peculiar concentration in the breast, as if something
were alive there, a new self or a new centre of consciousness, warning
him that sooner or later he would have to ask one woman or another. but
he belonged to miriam. of that she was so fixedly sure that he allowed
her right.



chapter x

clara

when he was twenty-three years old, paul sent in a landscape to the
winter exhibition at nottingham castle. miss jordan had taken a good
deal o