(he
laid stress on the word _uncomfortable_) "it is to dine alone."

at dinner he talked a little to his wife about moscow matters, and, with
a sarcastic smile, asked her after stepan arkadyevitch; but the
conversation was for the most part general, dealing with petersburg
official and public news. after dinner he spent half an hour with his
guests, and again, with a smile, pressed his wife’s hand, withdrew, and
drove off to the council. anna did not go out that evening either to the
princess betsy tverskaya, who, hearing of her return, had invited her,
nor to the theater, where she had a box for that evening. she did not go
out principally because the dress she had reckoned upon was not ready.
altogether, anna, on turning, after the departure of her guests, to the
consideration of her attire, was very much annoyed. she was generally a
mistress of the art of dressing well without great expense, and before
leaving moscow she had given her dressmaker three dresses to transform.
the dresses 
 
 ___________________________
 
and sweetmeats out of it, two pounds of
sweetmeats!... he’d been storing them up, the darling!"

vronsky burst into roars of laughter. and long afterwards, when he was
talking of other things, he broke out into his healthy laugh, showing
his strong, close rows of teeth, when he thought of the helmet.

having heard all the news, vronsky, with the assistance of his valet,
got into his uniform, and went off to report himself. he intended, when
he had done that, to drive to his brother’s and to betsy’s and to pay
several visits with a view to beginning to go into that society where he
might meet madame karenina. as he always did in petersburg, he left home
not meaning to return till late at night.




part two



chapter 1


at the end of the winter, in the shtcherbatskys’ house, a consultation
was being held, which was to pronounce on the state of kitty’s health
and the measures to be taken to restore her failing strength. she had
been ill, and as spring came on she grew worse. the f
 
 ___________________________
 
ss lidia
ivanovna as little as possible.

the third circle with which anna had ties was preeminently the
fashionable world—the world of balls, of dinners, of sumptuous dresses,
the world that hung on to the court with one hand, so as to avoid
sinking to the level of the demi-monde. for the demi-monde the members
of that fashionable world believed that they despised, though their
tastes were not merely similar, but in fact identical. her connection
with this circle was kept up through princess betsy tverskaya, her
cousin’s wife, who had an income of a hundred and twenty thousand
roubles, and who had taken a great fancy to anna ever since she first
came out, showed her much attention, and drew her into her set, making
fun of countess lidia ivanovna’s coterie.

"when i’m old and ugly i’ll be the same," betsy used to say; "but for a
pretty young woman like you it’s early days for that house of charity."

anna had at first avoided as far as she could princess tverskaya’s
world, bec
 
 ___________________________
 
ause it necessitated an expenditure beyond her means, and
besides in her heart she preferred the first circle. but since her visit
to moscow she had done quite the contrary. she avoided her
serious-minded friends, and went out into the fashionable world. there
she met vronsky, and experienced an agitating joy at those meetings. she
met vronsky specially often at betsy’s for betsy was a vronsky by birth
and his cousin. vronsky was everywhere where he had any chance of
meeting anna, and speaking to her, when he could, of his love. she gave
him no encouragement, but every time she met him there surged up in her
heart that same feeling of quickened life that had come upon her that
day in the railway carriage when she saw him for the first time. she was
conscious herself that her delight sparkled in her eyes and curved her
lips into a smile, and she could not quench the expr
 
 ___________________________
 
e world was in the theater. vronsky, seeing his cousin from
his stall in the front row, did not wait till the entr’acte, but went to
her box.

"why didn’t you come to dinner?" she said to him. "i marvel at the
second sight of lovers," she added with a smile, so that no one but he
could hear; "_she wasn’t there_. but come after the opera."

vronsky looked inquiringly at her. she nodded. he thanked her by a
smile, and sat down beside her.

"but how i remember your jeers!" continued princess betsy, who took a
peculiar pleasure in following up this passion to a successful issue.
"what’s become of all that? you’re caught, my dear boy."

"that’s my one desire, to be caught," answered vronsky, with his serene,
good-humored smile. "if i complain of anything it’s only that i’m not
caught enough, to tell the truth. i begin to lose hope."

"why, whatever hope can you have?" said betsy, offended on behalf of her
friend. "_entendons nous...._" but in her eyes there were gleams of
light t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat betrayed that she understood perfectly and precisely as he
did what hope he might have.

"none whatever," said vronsky, laughing and showing his even rows of
teeth. "excuse me," he added, taking an opera glass out of her hand, and
proceeding to scrutinize, over her bare shoulder, the row of boxes
facing them. "i’m afraid i’m becoming ridiculous."

he was very well aware that he ran no risk of being ridiculous in the
eyes of betsy or any other fashionable people. he was very well aware
that in their eyes the position of an unsuccessful lover of a girl, or
of any woman free to marry, might be ridiculous. but the position of a
man pursuing a married woman, and, regardless of everything, staking his
life on drawing her into adultery, has something fine and grand about
it, and can never be ridiculous; and so it was with a proud and gay
smile under his mustaches that he lowered the opera glass and looked at
his cousin.

"but 
 
 ___________________________
 
t you didn’t come to dinner?" she said, admiring him.

"i must tell you about that. i was busily employed, and doing what, do
you suppose? i’ll give you a hundred guesses, a thousand ... you’d never
guess. i’ve been reconciling a husband with a man who’d insulted his
wife. yes, really!"

"well, did you succeed?"

"almost."

"you really must tell me about it," she said, getting up. "come to me in
the next _entr’acte._"

"i can’t; i’m going to the french theater."

"from nilsson?" betsy queried in horror, though she could not herself
have distinguished nilsson’s voice from any chorus girl’s.

"can’t help it. i’ve an appointment there, all to do with my mission of
peace."

"‘blessed are the peacemakers; theirs is the kingdom of heaven,’" said
betsy, vaguely recollecting she had heard some similar saying from
someone. "very well, then, sit down, and tell me what it’s all about."

and she sat down again.



chapter 5


"this is rather indiscreet, but it’s so good 
 
 ___________________________
 
able woman—has been exposed to the persecution, and
insults, and effrontery of young upstarts, scoundrels....’ and you must
understand, the young upstarts are present all the while, and i have to
keep the peace between them. again i call out all my diplomacy, and
again as soon as the thing was about at an end, our friend the
government clerk gets hot and red, and his sausages stand on end with
wrath, and once more i launch out into diplomatic wiles."

"ah, he must tell you this story!" said betsy, laughing, to a lady who
came into her box. "he has been making me laugh so."

"well, _bonne chance_!" she added, giving vronsky one finger of the hand
in which she held her fan, and with a shrug of her shoulders she
twitched down the bodice of her gown that had worked up, so as to be
duly naked as she moved forward towards the footlights into the light of
the gas, and the sight of all eyes.

vronsky drove to the french theater, where he really had to see the
colonel of his regiment, who never 
 
 ___________________________
 
led the
details, and how vronsky, at the last half word of conciliation,
skillfully maneuvered a retreat, shoving petritsky out before him.

"it’s a disgraceful story, but killing. kedrov really can’t fight the
gentleman! was he so awfully hot?" he commented, laughing. "but what do
you say to claire today? she’s marvelous," he went on, speaking of a new
french actress. "however often you see her, every day she’s different.
it’s only the french who can do that."



chapter 6


princess betsy drove home from the theater, without waiting for the end
of the last act. she had only just time to go into her dressing room,
sprinkle her long, pale face with powder, rub it, set her dress to
rights, and order tea in the big drawing room, when one after another
carriages drove up to her huge house in bolshaia morskaia. her guests
stepped out at the wide entrance, and the stout porter, who used to read
the newspapers in the mornings behind the glass door, to the edification
of the passers-by, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the last topic, that is, ill-natured gossip.

"have you heard the maltishtcheva woman—the mother, not the daughter—has
ordered a costume in _diable rose_ color?"

"nonsense! no, that’s too lovely!"

"i wonder that with her sense—for she’s not a fool, you know—that she
doesn’t see how funny she is."

everyone had something to say in censure or ridicule of the luckless
madame maltishtcheva, and the conversation crackled merrily, like a
burning faggot-stack.

the husband of princess betsy, a good-natured fat man, an ardent
collector of engravings, hearing that his wife had visitors, came into
the drawing room before going to his club. stepping noiselessly over the
thick rugs, he went up to princess myakaya.

"how did you like nilsson?" he asked.

"oh, how can you steal upon anyone like that! how you startled me!" she
responded. "please don’t talk to me about the opera; you know nothing
about music. i’d better meet you on your own ground, and talk about your
majolica and engr
 
 ___________________________
 
ecret of the sensation she produced lay in the fact that though
she spoke not always appropriately, as now, she said simple things with
some sense in them. in the society in which she lived such plain
statements produced the effect of the wittiest epigram. princess myakaya
could never see why it had that effect, but she knew it had, and took
advantage of it.

as everyone had been listening while princess myakaya spoke, and so the
conversation around the ambassador’s wife had dropped, princess betsy
tried to bring the whole party together, and turned to the ambassador’s
wife.

"will you really not have tea? you should come over here by us."

"no, we’re very happy here," the ambassador’s wife responded with a
smile, and she went on with the conversation that had been begun.

it was a very agreeable conversation. they were criticizing the
karenins, husband and wife.

"anna is quite changed since her stay in moscow. there’s something
strange about her," said her friend.

"the great ch
 
 ___________________________
 
love with her, and
follow her about like shadows?"

"oh, i had no idea of blaming her for it," anna’s friend said in
self-defense.

"if no one follows us about like a shadow, that’s no proof that we’ve
any right to blame her."

and having duly disposed of anna’s friend, the princess myakaya got up,
and together with the ambassador’s wife, joined the group at the table,
where the conversation was dealing with the king of prussia.

"what wicked gossip were you talking over there?" asked betsy.

"about the karenins. the princess gave us a sketch of alexey
alexandrovitch," said the ambassador’s wife with a smile, as she sat
down at the table.

"pity we didn’t hear it!" said princess betsy, glancing towards the
door. "ah, here you are at last!" she said, turning with a smile to
vronsky, as he came in.

vronsky was not merely acquainted with all the persons whom he was
meeting here; he saw them all every day; and so he came in with the
quiet manner with which one enters a room full 
 
 ___________________________
 
_opera bouffé_ to the
last minute, and enjoy it. this evening..."

he mentioned a french actress, and was going to tell something about
her; but the ambassador’s wife, with playful horror, cut him short.

"please don’t tell us about that horror."

"all right, i won’t especially as everyone knows those horrors."

"and we should all go to see them if it were accepted as the correct
thing, like the opera," chimed in princess myakaya.



chapter 7


steps were heard at the door, and princess betsy, knowing it was madame
karenina, glanced at vronsky. he was looking towards the door, and his
face wore a strange new expression. joyfully, intently, and at the same
time timidly, he gazed at the approaching figure, and slowly he rose to
his feet. anna walked into the drawing room. holding herself extremely
erect, as always, looking straight before her, and moving with her
swift, resolute, and light step, that distinguished her from all other
society women, she crossed the short space to her ho
 
 ___________________________
 
stess, shook hands
with her, smiled, and with the same smile looked around at vronsky.
vronsky bowed low and pushed a chair up for her.

she acknowledged this only by a slight nod, flushed a little, and
frowned. but immediately, while rapidly greeting her acquaintances, and
shaking the hands proffered to her, she addressed princess betsy:

"i have been at countess lidia’s, and meant to have come here earlier,
but i stayed on. sir john was there. he’s very interesting."

"oh, that’s this missionary?"

"yes; he told us about the life in india, most interesting things."

the conversation, interrupted by her coming in, flickered up again like
the light of a lamp being blown out.

"sir john! yes, sir john; i’ve seen him. he speaks well. the vlassieva
girl’s quite in love with him."

"and is it true the younger vlassieva gi
 
 ___________________________
 
recognize," said vronsky.

"but by marriages of prudence we mean those in which both parties have
sown their wild oats already. that’s like scarlatina—one has to go
through it and get it over."

"then they ought to find out how to vaccinate for love, like smallpox."

"i was in love in my young days with a deacon," said the princess
myakaya. "i don’t know that it did me any good."

"no; i imagine, joking apart, that to know love, one must make mistakes
and then correct them," said princess betsy.

"even after marriage?" said the ambassador’s wife playfully.

"‘it’s never too late to mend.’" the attaché repeated the english
proverb.

"just so," betsy agreed; "one must make mistakes and correct them. what
do you think about it?" she turned to anna, who, with a faintly
perceptible resolute smile on her lips, was listening in silence to the
conversation.

"i think," said anna, playing with the glove she had taken off, "i think
... of so many men, so many minds, certainly so many h
 
 ___________________________
 
azing at anna, and with a fainting heart waiting for what
she would say. he sighed as after a danger escaped when she uttered
these words.

anna suddenly turned to him.

"oh, i have had a letter from moscow. they write me that kitty
shtcherbatskaya’s very ill."

"really?" said vronsky, knitting his brows.

anna looked sternly at him.

"that doesn’t interest you?"

"on the contrary, it does, very much. what was it exactly they told you,
if i may know?" he questioned.

anna got up and went to betsy.

"give me a cup of tea," she said, standing at her table.

while betsy was pouring out the tea, vronsky went up to anna.

"what is it they write to you?" he repeated.

"i often think men have no understanding of what’s not honorable though
they’re always talking of it," said anna, without answering him. "i’ve
wanted to tell you so a long while," she added, and moving a few steps
away, she sat down at a table in a corner covered with albums.

"i don’t quite understand the meaning of you
 
 ___________________________
 
 as it is," he said in a
shaky voice. "here’s your husband."

at that instant alexey alexandrovitch did in fact walk into the room
with his calm, awkward gait.

glancing at his wife and vronsky, he went up to the lady of the house,
and sitting down for a cup of tea, began talking in his deliberate,
always audible voice, in his habitual tone of banter, ridiculing
someone.

"your rambouillet is in full conclave," he said, looking round at all
the party; "the graces and the muses."

but princess betsy could not endure that tone of his—"sneering," as she
called it, using the english word, and like a skillful hostess she at
once brought him into a serious conversation on the subject of universal
conscription. alexey alexandrovitch was immediately interested in the
subject, and began seriously defending the new imperial decree against
princess betsy, who had attacked it.

vronsky and anna still sat at the little table.

"this is getting indecorous," whispered one lady, with an expressive
glan
 
 ___________________________
 
ce at madame karenina, vronsky, and her husband.

"what did i tell you?" said anna’s friend.

but not only those ladies, almost everyone in the room, even the
princess myakaya and betsy herself, looked several times in the
direction of the two who had withdrawn from the general circle, as
though that were a disturbing fact. alexey alexandrovitch was the only
person who did not once look in that direction, and was not diverted
from the interesting discussion he had entered upon.

noticing the disagreeable impression that was being made on everyone,
princess betsy slipped someone else into her place to listen to alexey
alexandrovitch, and went up to anna.

"i’m always amazed a
 
 ___________________________
 
t the clearness and precision of your husband’s
language," she said. "the most transcendental ideas seem to be within my
grasp when he’s speaking."

"oh, yes!" said anna, radiant with a smile of happiness, and not
understanding a word of what betsy had said. she crossed over to the big
table and took part in the general conversation.

alexey alexandrovitch, after staying half an hour, went up to his wife
and suggested that they should go home together. but she answered, not
looking at him, that she was staying to supper. alexey alexandrovitch
made his bows and withdrew.

the fat old tatar, madame karenina’s coachman, was with difficulty
holding one of her pair of grays, chilled with the cold and rearing at
the entrance. a footman stood 
 
 ___________________________
 
noring, and
ceased; but after an interval of two breathings the snore sounded again,
with a new tranquil rhythm.

"it’s late, it’s late," she whispered with a smile. a long while she
lay, not moving, with open eyes, whose brilliance she almost fancied she
could herself see in the darkness.



chapter 10


from that time a new life began for alexey alexandrovitch and for his
wife. nothing special happened. anna went out into society, as she had
always done, was particularly often at princess betsy’s, and met vronsky
everywhere. alexey alexandrovitch saw this, but could do nothing. all
his efforts to draw her into open discussion she confronted with a
barrier which he could not penetrate, made up of a sort of amused
perplexity. outwardly everything was the same, but their inner relations
were completely changed. alexey alexandrovitch, a man of great power in
the world of politics, felt himself helpless in this. like an ox with
head bent, submissively he awaited the blow which he felt wa
 
 ___________________________
 
e had ordered he looked at a french novel
that lay open on his plate. he was only looking at the book to avoid
conversation with the officers coming in and out; he was thinking.

he was thinking of anna’s promise to see him that day after the races.
but he had not seen her for three days, and as her husband had just
returned from abroad, he did not know whether she would be able to meet
him today or not, and he did not know how to find out. he had had his
last interview with her at his cousin betsy’s summer villa. he visited
the karenins’ summer villa as rarely as possible. now he wanted to go
there, and he pondered the question how to do it.

"of course i shall say betsy has sent me to ask whether she’s coming to
the races. of course, i’ll go," he decided, lifting his head from the
book. and as he vividly pictured the happiness of seeing her, his face
lighted up.

"send to my house, and tell them to have out the carriage and three
horses as quick as they can," he said to the serv
 
 ___________________________
 
ly intimate singular.

"forgive you? i’m so glad!"

"but you’re ill or worried," he went on, not letting go her hands and
bending over her. "what were you thinking of?"

"always the same thing," she said, with a smile.

she spoke the truth. if ever at any moment she had been asked what she
was thinking of, she could have answered truly: of the same thing, of
her happiness and her unhappiness. she was thinking, just when he came
upon her, of this: why was it, she wondered, that to others, to betsy
(she knew of her secret connection with tushkevitch) it was all easy,
while to her it was such torture? today this thought gained special
poignancy from certain other considerations. she asked him about the
races. he answered her questions, and, seeing that she was agitated,
trying to calm her, he began telling her in the simplest tone the
details of his preparations for the races.

"tell him or not tell him?" she thought, looking into his quiet,
affectionate eyes. "he is so happy, so absorbed 
 
 ___________________________
 
 parted lips,
swiftly kissed his mouth and both eyes, and pushed him away. she would
have gone, but he held her back.

"when?" he murmured in a whisper, gazing in ecstasy at her.

"tonight, at one o’clock," she whispered, and, with a heavy sigh, she
walked with her light, swift step to meet her son.

seryozha had been caught by the rain in the big garden, and he and his
nurse had taken shelter in an arbor.

"well, _au revoir_," she said to vronsky. "i must soon be getting ready
for the races. betsy promised to fetch me."

vronsky, looking at his watch, went away hurriedly.



chapter 24


when vronsky looked at his watch on the karenins’ balcony, he was so
greatly agitated and lost in his thoughts that he saw the figures on the
watch’s face, but could not take in what time it was. he came out on to
the high road and walked, picking his way carefully through the mud, to
his carriage. he was so completely absorbed in his feeling for anna,
that he did not even think what o’clock it was
 
 ___________________________
 
e reins of his panting gray horse that looked dark
with sweat.

the horse, stiffening out its legs, with an effort stopped its rapid
course, and the officer of the horse-guards looked round him like a man
waking up from a heavy sleep, and just managed to smile. a crowd of
friends and outsiders pressed round him.

vronsky intentionally avoided that select crowd of the upper world,
which was moving and talking with discreet freedom before the pavilions.
he knew that madame karenina was there, and betsy, and his brother’s
wife, and he purposely did not go near them for fear of something
distracting his attention. but he was continually met and stopped by
acquaintances, who told him about the previous races, and kept asking
him why he was so late.

at the time when the racers had to go to the pavilion to receive the
prizes, and all attention was directed to that point, vronsky’s elder
brother, alexander, a colonel with heavy fringed epaulets, came up to
him. he was not tall, though as broad
 
 ___________________________
 
nt to
think at all about his wife’s behavior, and he actually succeeded in not
thinking about it at all.

alexey alexandrovitch’s permanent summer villa was in peterhof, and the
countess lidia ivanovna used as a rule to spend the summer there, close
to anna, and constantly seeing her. that year countess lidia ivanovna
declined to settle in peterhof, was not once at anna arkadyevna’s, and
in conversation with alexey alexandrovitch hinted at the unsuitability
of anna’s close intimacy with betsy and vronsky. alexey alexandrovitch
sternly cut her short, roundly declaring his wife to be above suspicion,
and from that time began to avoid countess lidia ivanovna. he did not
want to see, and did not see, that many people in society cast dubious
glances on his wife; he did not want to understand, and did not
understand, why his wife had so particularly insisted on staying at
tsarskoe, where betsy was staying, and not far from the camp of
vronsky’s regiment. he did not allow himself to thin
 
 ___________________________
 
ter dining
with his secretary, he invited him to drive with him to his country
villa and to the races.

though he did not acknowledge it to himself, alexey alexandrovitch
always tried nowadays to secure the presence of a third person in his
interviews with his wife.



chapter 27


anna was upstairs, standing before the looking glass, and, with
annushka’s assistance, pinning the last ribbon on her gown when she
heard carriage wheels crunching the gravel at the entrance.

"it’s too early for betsy," she thought, and glancing out of the window
she caught sight of the carriage and the black hat of alexey
alexandrovitch, and the ears that she knew so well sticking up each side
of it. "how unlucky! can he be going to stay the night?" she wondered,
and the thought of all that might come of such a chance struck her as so
awful and terrible that, without dwelling on it for a moment, she went
down to meet him with a bright and radiant face; and conscious of the
presence of that spirit of falseho
 
 ___________________________
 
od and deceit in herself that she had
come to know of late, she abandoned herself to that spirit and began
talking, hardly knowing what she was saying.

"ah, how nice of you!" she said, giving her husband her hand, and
greeting sludin, who was like one of the family, with a smile. "you’re
staying the night, i hope?" was the first word the spirit of falsehood
prompted her to utter; "and now we’ll go together. only it’s a pity i’ve
promised betsy. she’s coming for me."

alexey alexandrovitch knit his brows at betsy’s name.

"oh, i’m not going to separate the inseparables," he said in his usual
bantering tone. "i’m going with mihail vassilievitch. i’m ordered
exercise by the doctors too. i’ll walk, and fancy myself at the springs
again."

"there’s no hurry," said anna. "would you like tea?"

she rang.

"bring in tea, and tell seryozha that alexey alexandrovitch is here.
well, tell me, how have you been? mihail vassilievitch
 
 ___________________________
 

was holding his son by the shoulder while he was speaking to the
governess, and seryozha was so miserably uncomfortable that anna saw he
was on the point of tears.

anna, who had flushed a little the instant her son came in, noticing
that seryozha was uncomfortable, got up hurriedly, took alexey
alexandrovitch’s hand from her son’s shoulder, and kissing the boy, led
him out onto the terrace, and quickly came back.

"it’s time to start, though," said she, glancing at her watch. "how is
it betsy doesn’t come?..."

"yes," said alexey alexandrovitch, and getting up, he folded his hands
and cracked his fingers. "i’ve come to bring you some money, too, for
nightingales, we know, can’t live on fairy tales," he said. "you want
it, i expect?"

"no, i don’t ... yes, i do," she said, not looking at him, and
crimsoning to the roots of her hair. "but you’ll come back here after
the races, i suppose?"

"oh, yes!" answered alexey alexandrovitch. "and here’s the glory of
peterhof, prince
 
 ___________________________
 
 alexandrovitch and held out her hand to him. "it was ever so nice
of you to come."

alexey alexandrovitch kissed her hand.

"well, _au revoir_, then! you’ll come back for some tea; that’s
delightful!" she said, and went out, gay and radiant. but as soon as she
no longer saw him, she was aware of the spot on her hand that his lips
had touched, and she shuddered with repulsion.



chapter 28


when alexey alexandrovitch reached the race-course, anna was already
sitting in the pavilion beside betsy, in that pavilion where all the
highest society had gathered. she caught sight of her husband in the
distance. two men, her husband and her lover, were the two centers of
her existence, and unaided by her external senses she was aware of their
nearness. she was aware of her husband approaching a long way off, and
she could not help following him in the surging crowd in the midst of
which he was moving. she watched his progress towards the pavilion, saw
him now responding condescendingly to an i
 
 ___________________________
 
er. "nothing but
ambition, nothing but the desire to get on, that’s all there is in his
soul," she thought; "as for these lofty ideals, love of culture,
religion, they are only so many tools for getting on."

from his glances towards the ladies’ pavilion (he was staring straight
at her, but did not distinguish his wife in the sea of muslin, ribbons,
feathers, parasols and flowers) she saw that he was looking for her, but
she purposely avoided noticing him.

"alexey alexandrovitch!" princess betsy called to him; "i’m sure you
don’t see your wife: here she is."

he smiled his chilly smile.

"there’s so much splendor here that one’s eyes are dazzled," he said,
and he went into the pavilion. he smiled to his wife as a man should
smile on meeting his wife after only just parting from her, and greeted
the princess and other acquaintances, giving to each what was due—that
is to say, jesting with the ladies and dealing out friendly greetings
among the men. below, near the pavilion, wa
 
 ___________________________
 
 to the general
with whom he was talking seriously; "we mustn’t forget that those who
are taking part in the race are military men, who have chosen that
career, and one must allow that every calling has its disagreeable side.
it forms an integral part of the duties of an officer. low sports, such
as prize-fighting or spanish bull-fights, are a sign of barbarity. but
specialized trials of skill are a sign of development."

"no, i shan’t come another time; it’s too upsetting," said princess
betsy. "isn’t it, anna?"

"it is upsetting, but one can’t tear oneself away," said another lady.
"if i’d been a roman woman i should never have missed a single circus."

anna said nothing, and keeping her opera glass up, gazed always at the
same spot.

at that moment a tall general walked through the pavilion. breaking off
what he was saying, alexey alexandrovitch got up hurriedly, though with
dignity, and bowed low to the general.

"you’re not racing?" the officer asked, chaffing him.

"my r
 
 ___________________________
 
y alexandrovitch responded
deferentially.

and though the answer meant nothing, the general looked as though he had
heard a witty remark from a witty man, and fully relished _la pointe de
la sauce_.

"there are two aspects," alexey alexandrovitch resumed: "those who take
part and those who look on; and love for such spectacles is an
unmistakable proof of a low degree of development in the spectator, i
admit, but..."

"princess, bets!" sounded stepan arkadyevitch’s voice from below,
addressing betsy. "who’s your favorite?"

"anna and i are for kuzovlev," replied betsy.

"i’m for vronsky. a pair of gloves?"

"done!"

"but it is a pretty sight, isn’t it?"

alexey alexandrovitch paused while there was talking about him, but he
began again directly.

"i admit that manly sports do not..." he was continuing.

but at that moment the racers started, and all conversation ceased.
alexey alexandrovitch too was silent, and everyone stood up and turned
towards the stream. alexey alexandrovitch to
 
 ___________________________
 
dly expressing disapprobation, everyone was repeating a
phrase some one had uttered—"the lions and gladiators will be the next
thing," and everyone was feeling horrified; so that when vronsky fell to
the ground, and anna moaned aloud, there was nothing very out of the way
in it. but afterwards a change came over anna’s face which really was
beyond decorum. she utterly lost her head. she began fluttering like a
caged bird, at one moment would have got up and moved away, at the next
turned to betsy.

"let us go, let us go!" she said.

but betsy did not hear her. she was bending down, talking to a general
who had come up to her.

alexey alexandrovitch went up to anna and courteously offered her his
arm.

"let us go, if you like," he said in french, but anna was listening to
the general and did not notice her husband.

"he’s broken his leg too, so they say," the general was saying. "this is
beyond everything."

without answering her husband, anna lifted her opera glass and gazed
towards t
 
 ___________________________
 
he
tsar. anna craned forward, listening.

"stiva! stiva!" she cried to her brother.

but her brother did not hear her. again she would have moved away.

"once more i offer you my arm if you want to be going," said alexey
alexandrovitch, reaching towards her hand.

she drew back from him with aversion, and without looking in his face
answered:

"no, no, let me be, i’ll stay."

she saw now that from the place of vronsky’s accident an officer was
running across the course towards the pavilion. betsy waved her
handkerchief to him. the officer brought the news that the rider was not
killed, but the horse had broken its back.

on hearing this anna sat down hurriedly, and hid her face in her fan.
alexey alexandrovitch saw that she was weeping, and could not control
her tears, nor even the sobs that were shaking her bosom. alexey
alexandrovitch stood so as to screen her, giving her time to recover
herself.

"for the third time i offer you my arm," he said to her after a little
time, turning to 
 
 ___________________________
 
her. anna gazed at him and did not know what to say.
princess betsy came to her rescue.

"no, alexey alexandrovitch; i brought anna and i promised to take her
home," put in betsy.

"excuse me, princess," he said, smiling courteously but looking her very
firmly in the face, "but i see that anna’s not very well, and i wish her
to come home with me."

anna looked about her in a frightened way, got up submissively, and laid
her hand on her husband’s arm.

"i’ll send to him and find out, and let you know," betsy whispered to
her.

as they left the pavilion, alexey alexandrovitch, as always, talked to
those he met, and anna had, as always, to talk and answer; but she wa
 
 ___________________________
 
whole time of the drive home. on reaching the house he turned his
head to her, still with the same expression.

"very well! but i expect a strict observance of the external forms of
propriety till such time"—his voice shook—"as i may take measures to
secure my honor and communicate them to you."

he got out first and helped her to get out. before the servants he
pressed her hand, took his seat in the carriage, and drove back to
petersburg. immediately afterwards a footman came from princess betsy
and brought anna a note.

"i sent to alexey to find out how he is, and he writes me he is quite
well and unhurt, but in despair."

"so _he_ will be here," she thought. "what a good thing i told him all!"

she glanced at her watch. she had still three hours to wait, and the
memories of their last meeting set her blood in flame.

"my god, how light it is! it’s dreadful, but i do love to see his face,
and i do love this fantastic light.... my husband! oh! yes.... well,
thank god! everything’s 
 
 ___________________________
 
 she could not bring herself to look those of
her own household in the face. she could not bring herself to call her
maid, and still less go downstairs and see her son and his governess.

the maid, who had been listening at her door for a long while, came into
her room of her own accord. anna glanced inquiringly into her face, and
blushed with a scared look. the maid begged her pardon for coming in,
saying that she had fancied the bell rang. she brought her clothes and a
note. the note was from betsy. betsy reminded her that liza merkalova
and baroness shtoltz were coming to play croquet with her that morning
with their adorers, kaluzhsky and old stremov. "come, if only as a study
in morals. i shall expect you," she finished.

anna read the note and heaved a deep sigh.

"nothing, i need nothing," she said to annushka, who was rearranging the
bottles and brushes on the dressing table. "you can go. i’ll dress at
once and come down. i need nothing."

annushka went out, but anna did not begin
 
 ___________________________
 
 yes," said anna. "let him wait. i’ll ring."

"what can i write?" she thought. "what can i decide upon alone? what do
i know? what do i want? what is there i care for?" again she felt that
her soul was beginning to be split in two. she was terrified again at
this feeling, and clutched at the first pretext for doing something
which might divert her thoughts from herself. "i ought to see alexey"
(so she called vronsky in her thoughts); "no one but he can tell me what
i ought to do. i’ll go to betsy’s, perhaps i shall see him there," she
said to herself, completely forgetting that when she had told him the
day before that she was not going to princess tverskaya’s, he had said
that in that case he should not go either. she went up to the table,
wrote to her husband, "i have received your letter.—a."; and, ringing
the bell, gave it to the footman.

"we are not going," she said to annushka, as she came in.

"not going at all?"

"no; don’t unpack till tomorrow, and let the carriage wai
 
 ___________________________
 
ndecision, was still the same as at
home—worse, in fact, since it was impossible to take any step,
impossible to see vronsky, and she had to remain here among outsiders,
in company so uncongenial to her present mood. but she was wearing a
dress that she knew suited her. she was not alone; all around was that
luxurious setting of idleness that she was used to, and she felt less
wretched than at home. she was not forced to think what she was to do.
everything would be done of itself. on meeting betsy coming towards her
in a white gown that struck her by its elegance, anna smiled at her just
as she always did. princess tverskaya was walking with tushkevitch and a
young lady, a relation, who, to the great joy of her parents in the
provinces, was spending the summer with the fashionable princess.

there was probably something unusual about anna, for betsy noticed it at
once.

"i slept badly," answered anna, looking intently at the footman who came
to meet them, and, as she supposed, brought vr
 
 ___________________________
 
onsky’s note.

"how glad i am you’ve come!" said betsy. "i’m tired, and was just
longing to have some tea before they come. you might go"—she turned to
tushkevitch—"with masha, and try the croquet ground over there where
they’ve been cutting it. we shall have time to talk a little over tea;
we’ll have a cozy chat, eh?" she said in english to anna, with a smile,
pressing the hand with which she held a parasol.

"yes, especially as i can’t stay very long with you. i’m forced to go on
to old madame vrede. i’ve been promising to go for 
 
 ___________________________
 
have explained. she had said it simply from the
reflection that as vronsky would not be here, she had better secure her
own freedom, and try to see him somehow. but why she had spoken of old
madame vrede, whom she had to go and see, as she had to see many other
people, she could not have explained; and yet, as it afterwards turned
out, had she contrived the most cunning devices to meet vronsky, she
could have thought of nothing better.

"no. i’m not going to let you go for anything," answered betsy, looking
intently into anna’s face. "really, if i were not fond of you, i should
feel offended. one would think you were afraid my society would
compromise you. tea in the little dining room, please," she said, half
closing her eyes, as she always did when addressing the footman.

taking the note from him, she read it.

"alexey’s playing us false," she said in french; "he writes that he
can’t come," she added in a tone as simple and natural as though it
could never enter her head that vro
 
 ___________________________
 
nsky could mean anything more to anna
than a game of croquet. anna knew that betsy knew everything, but,
hearing how she spoke of vronsky before her, she almost felt persuaded
for a minute that she knew nothing.

"ah!" said anna indifferently, as though not greatly interested in the
matter, and she went on smiling: "how can you or your friends compromise
anyone?"

this playing with words, this hiding of a secret, had a great
fascination for anna, as, indeed, it has for all women. and it was not
the necessity of concealment, not the aim with which the concealment was
contrived
 
 ___________________________
 
 that i haven’t the
time."

"no; you don’t care, perhaps, to meet stremov? let him and alexey
alexandrovitch tilt at each other in the committee—that’s no affair of
ours. but in the world, he’s the most amiable man i know, and a devoted
croquet player. you shall see. and, in spite of his absurd position as
liza’s lovesick swain at his age, you ought to see how he carries off
the absurd position. he’s very nice. sappho shtoltz you don’t know? oh,
that’s a new type, quite new."

betsy said all this, and, at the same time, from her good-humored,
shrewd glance, anna felt that she partly guessed her plight, and was
hatching something for her benefit. they were in the little boudoir.

"i must write to alexey though," and betsy sat down to the table,
scribbled a few lines, and put the note in an envelope.

"i’m telling him to come to dinner. i’ve one lady extra to dinner with
me, and no man to take her in. look what i’ve said, will that persuade
him? excuse me, i must leave
 
 ___________________________
 
 you for a minute. would you seal it up,
please, and send it off?" she said from the door; "i have to give some
directions."

without a moment’s thought, anna sat down to the table with betsy’s
letter, and, without reading it, wrote below: "it’s essential for me to
see you. come to the vrede garden. i shall be there at six o’clock." she
sealed it up, and, betsy coming back, in her presence handed the note to
be taken.

at tea, which was brought them on a little tea-table in the cool little
drawing room, the cozy chat promised by princess tverskaya before the
arrival of her visitors really did come off between the two women. they
criticized the people they were expecting, and the conversation fell
upon liza merkalova.

"she’s very sweet, and i always liked her," said anna.

"you ought to like her. she raves about you. yesterday she came up to me
afte
 
 ___________________________
 
f she were a man she would do all
sorts of mad things for your sake. stremov says she does that as it is."

"but do tell me, please, i never could make it out," said anna, after
being silent for some time, speaking in a tone that showed she was not
asking an idle question, but that what she was asking was of more
importance to her than it should have been; "do tell me, please, what
are her relations with prince kaluzhsky, mishka, as he’s called? i’ve
met them so little. what does it mean?"

betsy smiled with her eyes, and looked intently at anna.

"it’s a new manner," she said. "they’ve all adopted that manner. they’ve
flung their caps over the windmills. but there are ways and ways of
flinging them."

"yes, but what are her relations precisely with kaluzhsky?"

betsy broke into unexpectedly mirthful and irrepressible laughter, a
thing which rarely happened with her.

"you’re encroaching on princess myakaya’s special domain now. that’s the
question of an _enfant terrible_," 
 
 ___________________________
 
and betsy obviously tried to restrain
herself, but could not, and went off into peals of that infectious
laughter that people laugh who do not laugh often. "you’d better ask
them," she brought out, between tears of laughter.

"no; you laugh," said anna, laughing too in spite of herself, "but i
never could understand it. i can’t understand the husband’s rôle in it."

"the husband? liza merkalova’s husband carries her shawl, and is always
ready to be of use. but anything more than that in reality,
 
 ___________________________
 
 no one cares
to inquire. you know in decent society one doesn’t talk or think even of
certain details of the toilet. that’s how it is with this."

"will you be at madame rolandak’s fête?" asked anna, to change the
conversation.

"i don’t think so," answered betsy, and, without looking at her friend,
she began filling the little transparent cups with fragrant tea. putting
a cup before anna, she took out a cigarette, and, fitting it into a
silver holder, she lighted it.

"it’s like this, you see: i’m in a fortunate position," she began, quite
serious now, as she took up her cup. "i understand you, and i understand
liza. liza now is one of those naïve natures that, like children, don’t
know what’s good and what’s bad. anyway, she didn’t compre
 
 ___________________________
 
hend it when
she was very young. and now she’s aware that the lack of comprehension
suits her. now, perhaps, she doesn’t know on purpose," said betsy, with
a subtle smile. "but, anyway, it suits her. the very same thing, don’t
you see, may be looked at tragically, and turned into a misery, or it
may be looked at simply and even humorously. possibly you are inclined
to look at things too tragically."

"how i should like to know other people just as i know myself!" said
anna, seriously and dreamily. "am i worse than other people, or better?
i think i’m worse."

"_enfant terrible, enfant terrible!_" repeated betsy. "but here they
are."



c
 
 ___________________________
 
er head was equal in
size to the elegantly rounded bust, of which so much was exposed in
front. the impulsive abruptness of her movements was such that at every
step the lines of her knees and the upper part of her legs were
distinctly marked under her dress, and the question involuntarily rose
to the mind where in the undulating, piled-up mountain of material at
the back the real body of the woman, so small and slender, so naked in
front, and so hidden behind and below, really came to an end.

betsy made haste to introduce her to anna.

"only fancy, we all but ran over two soldiers," she began telling them
at once, using her eyes, smiling and twitching away her tail, which she
flung back at one stroke all on one side. "i drove here with vaska....
ah, to be sure, you don’t know each other." and mentioning his surname
she introduced the young man, and reddening a little, broke into a
ringing laugh at her mistake—that is, at her having called him vaska to
a stranger. vaska bowed once more
 
 ___________________________
 
 to anna, but he said nothing to her.
he addressed sappho: "you’ve lost your bet. we got here first. pay up,"
said he, smiling.

sappho laughed still more festively.

"not just now," said she.

"oh, all right, i’ll have it later."

"very well, very well. oh, yes." she turned suddenly to princess betsy:
"i am a nice person ... i positively forgot it ... i’ve brought you a
visitor. and here he comes." the unexpected young visitor, whom sappho
had invited, and whom she had forgotten, was, however, a personage of
such consequence that, in spite of his youth, both the ladies rose on
his entrance.

he was a new admirer of sappho’s. he now dogged her footsteps, like
vaska.

soon after prince kaluzhsky arrived, and liza merkalova with stremov.
liza merkalova was a thin brunette, with an oriental
 
 ___________________________
 
, languid type of
face, and—as everyone used to say—exquisite enigmatic eyes. the tone of
her dark dress (anna immediately observed and appreciated the fact) was
in perfect harmony with her style of beauty. liza was as soft and
enervated as sappho was smart and abrupt.

but to anna’s taste liza was far more attractive. betsy had said to anna
that she had adopted the pose of an innocent child, but when anna saw
her, she felt that this was not the truth. she really was both innocent
and corrupt, but a sweet and passive woman. it is true that her tone was
the same as sappho’s; that like sappho, she had two men, one young and
one old, tacked onto her, and devouring her with their eyes. but there
was something in her higher than what surrounded her. there was in her
the glow of the real diamond among glass imitations.
 
 ___________________________
 
t go either, will you? who wants to play croquet?"

"oh, i like it," said anna.

"there, how do you manage never to be bored by things? it’s delightful
to look at you. you’re alive, but i’m bored."

"how can you be bored? why, you live in the liveliest set in
petersburg," said anna.

"possibly the people who are not of our set are even more bored; but
we—i certainly—are not happy, but awfully, awfully bored."

sappho smoking a cigarette went off into the garden with the two young
men. betsy and stremov remained at the tea-table.

"what, bored!" said betsy. "sappho says they did enjoy themselves
tremendously at your house last night."

"ah, how dreary it all was!" said liza merkalova. "we all drove back to
my place after the races. and always the same people, always the same.
always the same thing. we lounged about on sofas all the evening. what
is there to enjoy in that? no; do tell me how you manage never to be
bored?" she said, addressing anna again. "one has but to look at you 
 
 ___________________________
 
d fumbled with something
at the lamp, the whip cracked, and the carriage rolled rapidly along the
smooth highroad.

"i want nothing, nothing but this happiness," he thought, staring at the
bone button of the bell in the space between the windows, and picturing
to himself anna just as he had seen her last time. "and as i go on, i
love her more and more. here’s the garden of the vrede villa.
whereabouts will she be? where? how? why did she fix on this place to
meet me, and why does she write in betsy’s letter?" he thought,
wondering now for the first time at it. but there was now no time for
wonder. he called to the driver to stop before reaching the avenue, and
opening the door, jumped out of the carriage as it was moving, and went
into the avenue that led up to the house. there was no one in the
avenue; but looking round to the right he caught sight of her. her face
was hidden by a veil, but he drank in with glad eyes the special
movement in walking, peculiar to her alone, the slope of 
 
 ___________________________
 
on he took an important resolution. to the
astonishment of the commission, he announced that he should ask
permission to go himself to investigate the question on the spot. and
having obtained permission, alexey alexandrovitch prepared to set off to
these remote provinces.

alexey alexandrovitch’s departure made a great sensation, the more so as
just before he started he officially returned the posting-fares allowed
him for twelve horses, to drive to his destination.

"i think it very noble," betsy said about this to the princess myakaya.
"why take money for posting-horses when everyone knows that there are
railways everywhere now?"

but princess myakaya did not agree, and the princess tverskaya’s opinion
annoyed her indeed.

"it’s all very well for you to talk," said she, "when you have i don’t
know how many millions; but i am very glad when my husband goes on a
revising tour in the summer. it’s very good for him and pleasant
traveling about, and it’s a settled arrangement for 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed the
baby. for a minute he was still, and with the same despondent face gazed
at the baby; but all at once a smile, that moved his hair and the skin
of his forehead, came out on his face, and he went as softly out of the
room.

in the dining room he rang the bell, and told the servant who came in to
send again for the doctor. he felt vexed with his wife for not being
anxious about this exquisite baby, and in this vexed humor he had no
wish to go to her; he had no wish, either, to see princess betsy. but
his wife might wonder why he did not go to her as usual; and so,
overcoming his disinclination, he went towards the bedroom. as he walked
over the soft rug towards the door, he could not help overhearing a
conversation he did not want to hear.

"if he hadn’t been going away, i could have understood your answer and
his too. but your husband ought to be above that," betsy was saying.

"it’s not for my husband; for myself i don’t wish it. don’t say that!"
answered anna’s excited voi
 
 ___________________________
 
guilty expression, alexey alexandrovitch stopped and
would have gone back unobserved. but reflecting that this would be
undignified, he turned back again, and clearing his throat, he went up
to the bedroom. the voices were silent, and he went in.

anna, in a gray dressing gown, with a crop of short clustering black
curls on her round head, was sitting on a settee. the eagerness died out
of her face, as it always did, at the sight of her husband; she dropped
her head and looked round uneasily at betsy. betsy, dressed in the
height of the latest fashion, in a hat that towered somewhere over her
head like a shade on a lamp, in a blue dress with violet crossway
stripes slanting one way on the bodice and the other way on the skirt,
was sitting beside anna, her tall flat figure held erect. bowing her
head, she greeted alexey alexandrovitch with an ironical smile.

"ah!" she said, as though surprised. "i’m very glad you’re at home. you
never put in an appearance anywhere, and i haven’t seen 
 
 ___________________________
 
nna has been ill. i have heard all about it—your anxiety. yes, you’re a
wonderful husband!" she said, with a meaning and affable air, as though
she were bestowing an order of magnanimity on him for his conduct to his
wife.

alexey alexandrovitch bowed frigidly, and kissing his wife’s hand, asked
how she was.

"better, i think," she said, avoiding his eyes.

"but you’ve rather a feverish-looking color," he said, laying stress on
the word "feverish."

"we’ve been talking too much," said betsy. "i feel it’s selfishness on
my part, and i am going away."

she got up, but anna, suddenly flushing, quickly caught at her hand.

"no, wait a minute, please. i must tell you ... no, you." she turned to
alexey alexandrovitch, and her neck and brow were suffused with crimson.
"i won’t and can’t keep anything secret from you," she said.

alexey alexandrovitch cracked his fingers and bowed his head.

"betsy’s been telling me that count vronsky wants to come here to say
good-bye before his 
 
 ___________________________
 
departure for tashkend." she did not look at her
husband, and was evidently in haste to have everything out, however hard
it might be for her. "i told her i could not receive him."

"you said, my dear, that it would depend on alexey alexandrovitch,"
betsy corrected her.

"oh, no, i can’t receive him; and what object would there...." she
stopped suddenly, and glanced inquiringly at her husband (he did not
look at her). "in short, i don’t wish it...."

alexey alexandrovitch advanced and would have taken her hand.

her first impulse was to jerk back her hand from the damp hand with big
swollen veins that sought hers, but with an obvious effort to control
herself she pressed his hand.

"i am very grateful to you for your confidence, but..." he s
 
 ___________________________
 
aid, feeling
with confusion and annoyance that what he could decide easily and
clearly by himself, he could not discuss before princess tverskaya, who
to him stood for the incarnation of that brute force which would
inevitably control him in the life he led in the eyes of the world, and
hinder him from giving way to his feeling of love and forgiveness. he
stopped short, looking at princess tverskaya.

"well, good-bye, my darling," said betsy, getting up. she kissed anna,
and went out. alexey alexandrovitch escorted her out.

"alexey alexandrovitch! i know you are a truly magnanimous man," said
betsy, stopping in the little drawing-room, and with special warmth
shaking hands with him once more. "i am an outsider, but i so love her
and respect you that i venture to advise. receive him. alexey vronsky is
the soul of honor, and he is going away to tashkend."

"thank you, princess, for your sympathy and advice. but the question of
wheth
 
 ___________________________
 
er my wife can or cannot see anyone she must decide herself."

he said this from habit, lifting his brows with dignity, and reflected
immediately that whatever his words might be, there could be no dignity
in his position. and he saw this by the suppressed, malicious, and
ironical smile with which betsy glanced at him after this phrase.



chapter 20


alexey alexandrovitch took leave of betsy in the drawing room, and went
to his wife. she was lying down, but hearing his steps she sat up
hastily in her former attitude, and looked in a scared way at him. he
saw she had been crying.

"i am very grateful for your confidence in me." he repeated gently in
russian the phrase he had said in betsy’s presence in french, and sat
down beside her. when he spoke to her in russian, using the russian
"thou" of intimacy and affection, it was insufferably irritating to
anna. "and i am very grateful
 
 ___________________________
 
graced, and
he was not deprived of them nor forced to change his position. bad as
this might be, it was anyway better than a rupture, which would put her
in a hopeless and shameful position, and deprive him of everything he
cared for. but he felt helpless; he knew beforehand that every one was
against him, and that he would not be allowed to do what seemed to him
now so natural and right, but would be forced to do what was wrong,
though it seemed the proper thing to them.



chapter 21


before betsy had time to walk out of the drawing-room, she was met in
the doorway by stepan arkadyevitch, who had just come from yeliseev’s,
where a consignment of fresh oysters had been received.

"ah! princess! what a delightful meeting!" he began. "i’ve been to see
you."

"a meeting for one minute, for i’m going," said betsy, smiling and
putting on her glove.

"don’t put on your glove yet, princess; let me kiss your hand. there’s
nothing i’m so thankful to the revival of the old fashions for 
 
 ___________________________
 
as the
kissing the hand." he kissed betsy’s hand. "when shall we see each
other?"

"you don’t deserve it," answered betsy, smiling.

"oh, yes, i deserve a great deal, for i’ve become a most serious person.
i don’t only manage my own affairs, but other people’s too," he said,
with a significant expression.

"oh, i’m so glad!" answered betsy, at once understanding that he was
speaking of anna. and going back into the drawing room, they stood in a
corner. "he’s killing her," said betsy in a whisper full of meaning.
"it’s impossible, impossible..."

"i’m so glad you think so," said stepan arkadyevitch, shaking his head
with a serious and sympathetically distressed expression, "that’s what
i’ve come to petersburg for."

"the whole town’s talking of it," she said. "it’s an impossible
position. she pines and pines away. he doesn’t understand that she’s one
of those women who can’t trifle with their feelings. one of two things:
either let him take her away, act w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith energy, or give her a divorce.
this is stifling her."

"yes, yes ... just so..." oblonsky said, sighing. "that’s what i’ve come
for. at least not solely for that ... i’ve been made a _kammerherr_; of
course, one has to say thank you. but the chief thing was having to
settle this."

"well, god help you!" said betsy.

after accompanying betsy to the outside hall, once more kissing her hand
above the glove, at the point where the pulse beats, and murmuring to
her such unseemly nonsense that she did not know whether to laugh or be
angry, stepan arkadyevitch went to his sister. he found her in tears.

although he happened to be bubbling over with good spirits, stepan
arkadyevitch immediately and quite naturally fell into the sympathetic,
poetically emotional tone which harmonized with her mood. he asked her
how she was, and how she had
 
 ___________________________
 
ed him in all their charm.

serpuhovskoy had planned his appointment at tashkend, and vronsky agreed
to the proposition without the slightest hesitation. but the nearer the
time of departure came, the bitterer was the sacrifice he was making to
what he thought his duty.

his wound had healed, and he was driving about making preparations for
his departure for tashkend.

"to see her once and then to bury myself, to die," he thought, and as he
was paying farewell visits, he uttered this thought to betsy. charged
with this commission, betsy had gone to anna, and brought him back a
negative reply.

"so much the better," thought vronsky, when he received the news. "it
was a weakness, which would have shattered what strength i have left."

next day betsy herself came to him in the morning, and announced that
she had heard through oblonsky as a positive fact that alexey
alexandrovitch had agreed to a divorce, and that therefore vronsky could
see anna.

without even troubling himself to see betsy ou
 
 ___________________________
 
e. he felt that love saved him from despair, and
that this love, under the menace of despair, had become still stronger
and purer. the one mystery of death, still unsolved, had scarcely passed
before his eyes, when another mystery had arisen, as insoluble, urging
him to love and to life.

the doctor confirmed his suppositions in regard to kitty. her
indisposition was a symptom that she was with child.



chapter 21


from the moment when alexey alexandrovitch understood from his
interviews with betsy and with stepan arkadyevitch that all that was
expected of him was to leave his wife in peace, without burdening her
with his presence, and that his wife herself desired this, he felt so
distraught that he could come to no decision of himself; he did not know
himself what he wanted now, and putting himself in the hands of those
who were so pleased to interest themselves in his affairs, he met
everything with unqualified assent. it was only when anna had left his
house, and the english governess
 
 ___________________________
 
vronsky was experiencing in
regard to the world. though at the bottom of his heart he knew that the
world was shut on them, he put it to the test whether the world had not
changed by now and would not receive them. but he very quickly perceived
that though the world was open for him personally, it was closed for
anna. just as in the game of cat and mouse, the hands raised for him
were dropped to bar the way for anna.

one of the first ladies of petersburg society whom vronsky saw was his
cousin betsy.

"at last!" she greeted him joyfully. "and anna? how glad i am! where are
you stopping? i can fancy after your delightful travels you must find
our poor petersburg horrid. i can fancy your honeymoon in rome. how
about the divorce? is that all over?"

vronsky noticed that betsy’s enthusiasm waned when she learned that no
divorce had as yet taken place.

"people will throw stones at me, i know," she said, "but i shall come
and see anna; yes, i shall certainly come. you won’t be here long, i

 
 ___________________________
 
s. she unmistakably prided herself
on her courage, and wished anna to appreciate the fidelity of her
friendship. she only stayed ten minutes, talking of society gossip, and
on leaving she said:

"you’ve never told me when the divorce is to be? supposing i’m ready to
fling my cap over the mill, other starchy people will give you the cold
shoulder until you’re married. and that’s so simple nowadays. _ça se
fait_. so you’re going on friday? sorry we shan’t see each other again."

from betsy’s tone vronsky might have grasped what he had to expect from
the world; but he made another effort in his own family. his mother he
did not reckon upon. he knew that his mother, who had been so
enthusiastic over anna at their first acquaintance, would have no mercy
on her now for having ruined her son’s career. but he had more hope of
varya, his brother’s wife. he fancied she would not throw stones, and
would go simply and directly to see anna, and would receive her in her
own house.

the
 
 ___________________________
 

that there was something working within her; in her flashing eyes, when
they rested for a moment on him, there was an intense concentration, and
in her words and movements there was that nervous rapidity and grace
which, during the early period of their intimacy, had so fascinated him,
but which now so disturbed and alarmed him.

the dinner was laid for four. all were gathered together and about to go
into the little dining room when tushkevitch made his appearance with a
message from princess betsy. princess betsy begged her to excuse her not
having come to say good-bye; she had been indisposed, but begged anna to
come to her between half-past six and nine o’clock. vronsky glanced at
anna at the precise limit of time, so suggestive of steps having been
taken that she should meet no one; but anna appeared not to notice it.

"very sorry that i can’t come just between half-past six and nine," she
said with a faint smile.

"the princess will be very sorry."

"and so am i."

"you’re goin
 
 ___________________________
 
eviate my position. i see you
don’t understand all the difficulty of my position ... there in
petersburg," she added. "here i’m perfectly at ease and happy. well, of
that later on, though. then sviazhsky—he’s the marshal of the district,
and he’s a very good sort of a man, but he wants to get something out of
alexey. you understand, with his property, now that we are settled in
the country, alexey can exercise great influence. then there’s
tushkevitch—you have seen him, you know—betsy’s admirer. now he’s been
thrown over and he’s come to see us. as alexey says, he’s one of those
people who are very pleasant if one accepts them for what they try to
appear to be, _et puis il est comme il faut_, as princess varvara says.
then veslovsky ... you know him. a very nice boy," she said, and a sly
smile curved her lips. "what’s this wild story about him and the levins?
veslovsky told alexey about it, and we don’t believe it. _il est très
gentil et naïf_," she said again 
 
 ___________________________
 
he use of talking about
it?" she smiled. "well, what did he talk about with you?"

"he spoke of what i want to speak about of myself, and it’s easy for me
to be his advocate; of whether there is not a possibility ... whether
you could not..." (darya alexandrovna hesitated) "correct, improve your
position.... you know how i look at it.... but all the same, if
possible, you should get married...."

"divorce, you mean?" said anna. "do you know, the only woman who came to
see me in petersburg was betsy tverskaya? you know her, of course? _au
fond, c’est la femme la plus depraveé qui existe._ she had an intrigue
with tushkevitch, deceiving her husband in the basest way. and she told
me that she did not care to know me so long as my position was
irregular. don’t imagine i would compare ... i know you, darling. but i
could not help remembering.... well, so what did he say to you?" she
repeated.

"he said that he was unhappy on your account and his own. perhaps you
will say that it’s egois
 
 ___________________________
 
ad no thoughts
left for pretty women. i became quite an old gentleman. there was
nothing left for me but to think of my eternal salvation. i went off to
paris—i was as right as could be at once."

stepan arkadyevitch felt exactly the difference that pyotr oblonsky
described. in moscow he degenerated so much that if he had had to be
there for long together, he might in good earnest have come to
considering his salvation; in petersburg he felt himself a man of the
world again.

between princess betsy tverskaya and stepan arkadyevitch there had long
existed rather curious relations. stepan arkadyevitch always flirted
with her in jest, and used to say to her, also in jest, the most
unseemly things, knowing that nothing delighted her so much. the day
after his conversation with karenin, stepan arkadyevitch went to see
her, and felt so youthful that in this jesting flirtation and nonsense
he recklessly went so far that he did not know how to extricate himself,
as unluckily he was so far from be
 
 ___________________________
 
 into the street as though from a plague-stricken
house. for a long while he chatted and joked with his cab-driver, trying
to recover his spirits.

at the french theater where he arrived for the last act, and afterwards
at the tatar restaurant after his champagne, stepan arkadyevitch felt a
little refreshed in the atmosphere he was used to. but still he felt
quite unlike himself all that evening.

on getting home to pyotr oblonsky’s, where he was staying, stepan
arkadyevitch found a note from betsy. she wrote to him that she was very
anxious to finish their interrupted conversation, and begged him to come
next day. he had scarcely read this note, and frowned at its contents,
when he heard below the ponderous tramp of the servants, carrying
something heavy.

stepan arkadyevitch went out to look. it was the rejuvenated pyotr
oblonsky. he was so drunk that he could not walk upstairs; but he told
them to set him on his legs when he saw stepan arkadyevitch, and
clinging to him, walked with him