 the young
officer.

"you choose what we’re to drink," he said, handing him the card, and
looking at him.

"rhine wine, please," said the young officer, stealing a timid glance at
vronsky, and trying to pull his scarcely visible mustache. seeing that
vronsky did not turn round, the young officer got up.

"let’s go into the billiard room," he said.

the plump officer rose submissively, and they moved towards the door.

at that moment there walked into the room the tall and well-built
captain yashvin. nodding with an air of lofty contempt to the two
officers, he went up to vronsky.

"ah! here he is!" he cried, bringing his big hand down heavily on his
epaulet. vronsky looked round angrily, but his face lighted up
immediately with his characteristic expression of genial and manly
serenity.

"that’s it, alexey," said the captain, in his loud baritone. "you must
just eat a mouthful, now, and drink only one tiny glass."

"oh, i’m not hungry."

"there go the inseparables," yashvin dropped, g
 
 ___________________________
 
lancing sarcastically at
the two officers who were at that instant leaving the room. and he bent
his long legs, swathed in tight riding breeches, and sat down in the
chair, too low for him, so that his knees were cramped up in a sharp
angle.

"why didn’t you turn up at the red theater yesterday? numerova wasn’t at
all bad. where were you?"

"i was late at the tverskoys’," said vronsky.

"ah!" responded yashvin.

yashvin, a gambler and a rake, a man not merely without moral
principles, but of immoral principles, yashvin was vronsky’s greatest
friend in the regiment. vronsky liked him both for his exceptional
physical strength, which he showed for the most part by being able to
drink like a fish, and do without sleep without being in the slightest
degree affected by it; and for his great strength of character, which he
showed in his relations with his comrades and superior officers,
commanding both fear and re
 
 ___________________________
 
spect, and also at cards, when he would play
for tens of thousands and however much he might have drunk, always with
such skill and decision that he was reckoned the best player in the
english club. vronsky respected and liked yashvin particularly because
he felt yashvin liked him, not for his name and his money, but for
himself. and of all men he was the only one with whom vronsky would have
liked to speak of his love. he felt that yashvin, in spite of his
apparent contempt for every sort of feeling, was the only man who could,
so he fancied, comprehend the intense passion which now filled his whole
life. moreover, he felt certain that yashvin, as it was, took no delight
in gossip and scandal, and interpreted his feeling rightly, that is to
say, knew and believed that this passion was not a jest, not a pastime,
but something more serious and important.

vronsky had never spoken to him of his passion, but he was aware that he
knew
 
 ___________________________
 
ut it, and that he put the right interpretation on it, and
he was glad to see that in his eyes.

"ah! yes," he said, to the announcement that vronsky had been at the
tverskoys’; and his black eyes shining, he plucked at his left mustache,
and began twisting it into his mouth, a bad habit he had.

"well, and what did you do yesterday? win anything?" asked vronsky.

"eight thousand. but three don’t count; he won’t pay up."

"oh, then you can afford to lose over me," said vronsky, laughing.
(yashvin had bet heavily on vronsky in the races.)

"no chance of my losing. mahotin’s the only one that’s risky."

and the conversation passed to forecasts of the coming race, the only
thing vronsky could think of just now.

"come along, i’ve finished," said vronsky, and getting up he went to the
door. yashvin got up too, stretching his long legs and his long back.

"it’s too early for me to dine, but i must have a drink. i’ll come along
directly. hi, wine!" he shouted, in his rich voice, tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t always rang out
so loudly at drill, and set the windows shaking now.

"no, all right," he shouted again immediately after. "you’re going home,
so i’ll go with you."

and he walked out with vronsky.



chapter 20


vronsky was staying in a roomy, clean, finnish hut, divided into two by
a partition. petritsky lived with him in camp too. petritsky was asleep
when vronsky and yashvin came into the hut.

"get up, don’t go on sleeping," said yashvin, going behind the partition
and giving petritsky, who was lying with ruffled hair and with his nose
in the pillow, a prod on the shoulder.

petritsky jumped up suddenly onto his knees and looked round.

"your brother’s been here," he said to vronsky. "he waked me up, damn
him, and said he’d look in again." and pulling up the rug he flung
himself back on the pillow. "oh, do shut up, yashvin!" he said, getting
furious with yashvin, who was pulling the rug off him. "shut up!" he
turned over an
 
 ___________________________
 
d opened his eyes. "you’d better tell me what to drink;
such a nasty taste in my mouth, that..."

"brandy’s better than anything," boomed yashvin. "tereshtchenko! brandy
for your master and cucumbers," he shouted, obviously taking pleasure in
the sound of his own voice.

"brandy, do you think? eh?" queried petritsky, blinking and rubbing his
eyes. "and you’ll drink something? all right then, we’ll have a drink
together! vronsky, have a drink?" said petritsky, getting up and
wrapping the tiger-skin rug round him. he went to the door of the
partition wall, raised his hands, and hummed in french, "there was a
king in thule." "vronsky, w
 
 ___________________________
 
ill you have a drink?"

"go along," said vronsky, putting on the coat his valet handed to him.

"where are you off to?" asked yashvin. "oh, here are your three horses,"
he added, seeing the carriage drive up.

"to the stables, and i’ve got to see bryansky, too, about the horses,"
said vronsky.

vronsky had as a fact promised to call at bryansky’s, some eight miles
from peterhof, and to bring him some money owing for some horses; and he
hoped to have time to get that in too. but his comrades were at once
aware that he was not only going there.

petritsky, still humming, winked and made a pout with his lips, as
though he wo
 
 ___________________________
 
uld say: "oh, yes, we know your bryansky."

"mind you’re not late!" was yashvin’s only comment; and to change the
conversation: "how’s my roan? is he doing all right?" he inquired,
looking out of the window at the middle one of the three horses, which
he had sold vronsky.

"stop!" cried petritsky to vronsky as he was just going out. "your
brother left a letter and a note for you. wait a bit; where are they?"

vronsky stopped.

"well, where are they?"

"where are they? that’s just the question!" said petritsky solemnly,
moving his forefinger upwards from his nose.

"c
 
 ___________________________
 
ne of his regiment and one of another.

vronsky’s quarters were always a meeting place for all the officers.

"where are you off to?"

"i must go to peterhof."

"has the mare come from tsarskoe?"

"yes, but i’ve not seen her yet."

"they say mahotin’s gladiator’s lame."

"nonsense! but however are you going to race in this mud?" said the
other.

"here are my saviors!" cried petritsky, seeing them come in. before him
stood the orderly with a tray of brandy and salted cucumbers. "here’s
yashvin ordering me to drink a pick-me-up."

"well, you did give it to us yesterday," said one of those who had come
in; "you didn’t let us get a wink of sleep all night."

"oh, didn’t we make a pretty finish!" said petritsky. "volkov climbed
onto the roof and began telling us how sad he was. i said: ‘let’s have
music, the funeral march!’ he fairly dropped asleep on the roof over the
funeral march."

"drink it up; you positively must drink the brandy, and then seltzer
water and a lot of lemon
 
 ___________________________
 
," said yashvin, standing over petritsky like a
mother making a child take medicine, "and then a little champagne—just a
small bottle."

"come, there’s some sense in that. stop a bit, vronsky. we’ll all have a
drink."

"no; good-bye all of you. i’m not going to drink today."

"why, are you gaining weight? all right, then we must have it alone.
give us the seltzer water and lemon."

"vronsky!" shouted someone when he was already outside.

"well?"

"you’d better get your hair cut, it’ll weigh you dow
 
 ___________________________
 
ss; the mare knew what was wanted. she
quickened her pace and rose smoothly, just as he had fancied she would,
and as she left the ground gave herself up to the force of her rush,
which carried her far beyond the ditch; and with the same rhythm,
without effort, with the same leg forward, frou-frou fell back into her
pace again.

"bravo, vronsky!" he heard shouts from a knot of men—he knew they were
his friends in the regiment—who were standing at the obstacle. he could
not fail to recognize yashvin’s voice though he did not see him.

"o my sweet!" he said inwardly to frou-frou, as he listened for what was
happening behind. "he’s cleared it!" he thought, catching the thud of
gladiator’s hoofs behind him. there remained only the last ditch, filled
with water and five feet wide. vronsky did not even look at it, but
anxious to get in a long way first began sawing away at the reins,
lifting the mare’s head and letting it go in time with her paces. he
felt that the mare was at her very 
 
 ___________________________
 
icers of his
regiment, ran up to him. to his misery he felt that he was whole and
unhurt. the mare had broken her back, and it was decided to shoot her.
vronsky could not answer questions, could not speak to anyone. he
turned, and without picking up his cap that had fallen off, walked away
from the race course, not knowing where he was going. he felt utterly
wretched. for the first time in his life he knew the bitterest sort of
misfortune, misfortune beyond remedy, and caused by his own fault.

yashvin overtook him with his cap, and led him home, and half an hour
later vronsky had regained his self-possession. but the memory of that
race remained for long in his heart, the cruelest and bitterest memory
of his life.



chapter 26


the external relations of alexey alexandrovitch and his wife had
remained unchanged. the sole difference lay in the fact that he was more
busily occupied than ever. as in former years, at the beginning of the
spring he had gone to a foreign watering-place for the sa
 
 ___________________________
 
ass he put the
debts which he would have to pay at once, or for which he must in any
case have the money ready so that on demand for payment there could not
be a moment’s delay in paying. such debts amounted to about four
thousand: one thousand five hundred for a horse, and two thousand five
hundred as surety for a young comrade, venovsky, who had lost that sum
to a cardsharper in vronsky’s presence. vronsky had wanted to pay the
money at the time (he had that amount then), but venovsky and yashvin
had insisted that they would pay and not vronsky, who had not played.
that was so far well, but vronsky knew that in this dirty business,
though his only share in it was undertaking by word of mouth to be
surety for venovsky, it was absolutely necessary for him to have the two
thousand five hundred roubles so as to be able to fling it at the
swindler, and have no more words with him. and so for this first and
most important division he must have four thousand roubles. the second
class—eight t
 
 ___________________________
 
successful and are sure of the
recognition of their success by everyone. vronsky knew that radiant air,
and immediately observed it in serpuhovskoy.

as serpuhovskoy came down the steps he saw vronsky. a smile of pleasure
lighted up his face. he tossed his head upwards and waved the glass in
his hand, greeting vronsky, and showing him by the gesture that he could
not come to him before the quartermaster, who stood craning forward his
lips ready to be kissed.

"here he is!" shouted the colonel. "yashvin told me you were in one of
your gloomy tempers."

serpuhovskoy kissed the moist, fresh lips of the gallant-looking
quartermaster, and wiping his mouth with his handkerchief, went up to
vronsky.

"how glad i am!" he said, squeezing his hand and drawing him on one
side.

"you look after him," the colonel shouted to yashvin, pointing to
vronsky; and he went down below to the soldiers.

"why weren’t you at the races yesterday? i expected to see you there,"
said vronsky, scrutinizing serpuhovskoy.
 
 ___________________________
 


"i did go, but late. i beg your pardon," he added, and he turned to the
adjutant: "please have this divided from me, each man as much as it runs
to." and he hurriedly took notes for three hundred roubles from his
pocketbook, blushing a little.

"vronsky! have anything to eat or drink?" asked yashvin. "hi, something
for the count to eat! ah, here it is: have a glass!"

the fête at the colonel’s lasted a long while. there was a great deal of
drinking. they tossed serpuhovskoy in the air and caught him again
several times. then they did the same to the colonel. then, to the
accompaniment of the band, the colonel himself danced with petritsky.
then the colonel, who began to show signs of feebleness, sat down on a
bench in the courtyard and began demonstrating to yashvin the
superiority of r
 
 ___________________________
 
. the footman brought
vronsky a note.

"a man brought it from princess tverskaya."

vronsky opened the letter, and flushed crimson.

"my head’s begun to ache; i’m going home," he said to serpuhovskoy.

"oh, good-bye then. you give me _carte blanche!_"

"we’ll talk about it later on; i’ll look you up in petersburg."



chapter 22


it was six o’clock already, and so, in order to be there quickly, and at
the same time not to drive with his own horses, known to everyone,
vronsky got into yashvin’s hired fly, and told the driver to drive as
quickly as possible. it was a roomy, old-fashioned fly, with seats for
four. he sat in one corner, stretched his legs out on the front seat,
and sank into meditation.

a vague sense of the order into which his affairs had been brought, a
vague recollection of the friendliness and flattery of serpuhovskoy, who
had considered him a man that was needed, and most of all, the
anticipation of the interview before him—all blended into a general,
joyous 
 
 ___________________________
 
 all at once with a feeling of reproach, forgetting she had
herself kept from him everything concerning her son. she sent to ask him
to come to her immediately; with a throbbing heart she awaited him,
rehearsing to herself the words in which she would tell him all, and the
expressions of love with which he would console her. the messenger
returned with the answer that he had a visitor with him, but that he
would come immediately, and that he asked whether she would let him
bring with him prince yashvin, who had just arrived in petersburg. "he’s
not coming alone, and since dinner yesterday he has not seen me," she
thought; "he’s not coming so that i could tell him everything, but
coming with yashvin." and all at once a strange idea came to her: what
if he had ceased to love her?

and going over the events of the last few days, it seemed to her that
she saw in everything a confirmation of this terrible idea. the fact
that he had not dined at home yesterday, and the fact that he had
insisted
 
 ___________________________
 
had ceased to love her, she felt
close upon despair, and consequently she felt exceptionally alert. she
rang for her maid and went to her dressing room. as she dressed, she
took more care over her appearance than she had done all those days, as
though he might, if he had grown cold to her, fall in love with her
again because she had dressed and arranged her hair in the way most
becoming to her.

she heard the bell ring before she was ready. when she went into the
drawing room it was not he, but yashvin, who met her eyes. vronsky was
looking through the photographs of her son, which she had forgotten on
the table, and he made no haste to look round at her.

"we have met already," she said, putting her little hand into the huge
hand of yashvin, whose bashfulness was so queerly out of keeping with
his immense frame and coarse face. "we met last year at the races. give
them to me," she said, with a rapid movement snatching from vronsky the
photographs of her son, and glancing significantly at him
 
 ___________________________
 
 with flashing
eyes. "were the races good this year? instead of them i saw the races in
the corso in rome. but you don’t care for life abroad," she said with a
cordial smile. "i know you and all your tastes, though i have seen so
little of you."

"i’m awfully sorry for that, for my tastes are mostly bad," said
yashvin, gnawing at his left mustache.

having talked a little while, and noticing that vronsky glanced at the
clock, yashvin asked her whether she would be staying much longer in
petersburg, and unbending his huge figure reached after his cap.

"not long, i think," she said hesitatingly, glancing at vronsky.

"so then we shan’t meet again?"

"come and dine with me," said anna resolutely, angry it seemed with
herself for her embarrassment, but flushing as she always did when she
defined her position before a fresh person. "the dinner here is not
good, but at least you will see him. there is no one of his old friends
 
 ___________________________
 

in the regiment alexey cares for as he does for you."

"delighted," said yashvin with a smile, from which vronsky could see
that he liked anna very much.

yashvin said good-bye and went away; vronsky stayed behind.

"are you going too?" she said to him.

"i’m late already," he answered. "run along! i’ll catch you up in a
moment," he called to yashvin.

she took him by the hand, and without taking her eyes off him, gazed at
him while she ransacked her mind for the words to say that would keep
him.

"wait a minute, there’s something i want to say to you," and taking his
broad hand she pressed it on her neck. "oh, was it right my asking him
to dinner?"

"you did quite right," he said with a serene smile that showed his even
teeth, and he kissed her hand.

"alexey, you have not changed to me?" she said, pressing his hand in
both of hers. "ale
 
 ___________________________
 

chapter 32


when vronsky returned home, anna was not yet home. soon after he had
left, some lady, so they told him, had come to see her, and she had gone
out with her. that she had gone out without leaving word where she was
going, that she had not yet come back, and that all the morning she had
been going about somewhere without a word to him—all this, together with
the strange look of excitement in her face in the morning, and the
recollection of the hostile tone with which she had before yashvin
almost snatched her son’s photographs out of his hands, made him
serious. he decided he absolutely must speak openly with her. and he
waited for her in her drawing room. but anna did not return alone, but
brought with her her old unmarried aunt, princess oblonskaya. this was
the lady who had come in the morning, and with whom anna had gone out
shopping. anna appeared not to notice vronsky’s worried and inquiring
expression, and began a lively account of her morning’s shopping. he saw
that
 
 ___________________________
 
home for, what had she made tushkevitch stay to dinner for,
and, most amazing of all, why was she sending him for a box? could she
possibly think in her position of going to patti’s benefit, where all
the circle of her acquaintances would be? he looked at her with serious
eyes, but she responded with that defiant, half-mirthful, half-desperate
look, the meaning of which he could not comprehend. at dinner anna was
in aggressively high spirits—she almost flirted both with tushkevitch
and with yashvin. when they got up from dinner and tushkevitch had gone
to get a box at the opera, yashvin went to smoke, and vronsky went down
with him to his own rooms. after sitting there for some time he ran
upstairs. anna was already dressed in a low-necked gown of light silk
and velvet that she had had made in paris, and with costly white lace on
her head, framing her face, and particularly becoming, showing up her
dazzling beauty.

"are you really going to the theater?" he said, trying not to look at
her
 
 ___________________________
 
ace and full dress,
always so becoming to her. but now her beauty and elegance were just
what irritated him.

"my feeling cannot change, you know, but i beg you, i entreat you," he
said again in french, with a note of tender supplication in his voice,
but with coldness in his eyes.

she did not hear his words, but she saw the coldness of his eyes, and
answered with irritation:

"and i beg you to explain why i should not go."

"because it might cause you..." he hesitated.

"i don’t understand. yashvin _n’est pas compromettant_, and princess
varvara is no worse than others. oh, here she is!"



chapter 33


vronsky for the first time experienced a feeling of anger against anna,
almost a hatred for her willfully refusing to understand her own
position. this feeling was aggravated by his being unable to tell her
plainly the cause of his anger. if he had told her directly what he was
thinking, he would have said:

"in that dress, with a princess only too well known to everyone, to show
yoursel
 
 ___________________________
 
f at the theater is equivalent not merely to acknowledging your
position as a fallen woman, but is flinging down a challenge to society,
that is to say, cutting yourself off from it forever."

he could not say that to her. "but how can she fail to see it, and what
is going on in her?" he said to himself. he felt at the same time that
his respect for her was diminished while his sense of her beauty was
intensified.

he went back scowling to his rooms, and sitting down beside yashvin,
who, with his long legs stretched out on a chair, was drinking brandy
and seltzer water, he ordered a glass of the same for himself.

"you were talking of lankovsky’s powerful. that’s a fine horse, and i
would advise you to buy him," said yashvin, glancing at his comrade’s
gloomy face. "his hind-quarters aren’t quite first-rate, but the legs
and head—one couldn’t wish for anything better."

"i think i will take him," answered vronsky.

their conversation about horses interested him
 
 ___________________________
 
, but he did not for an
instant forget anna, and could not help listening to the sound of steps
in the corridor and looking at the clock on the chimney piece.

"anna arkadyevna gave orders to announce that she has gone to the
theater."

yashvin, tipping another glass of brandy into the bubbling water, drank
it and got up, buttoning his coat.

"well, let’s go," he said, faintly smiling under his mustache, and
showing by this smile that he knew the cause of vronsky’s gloominess,
and did not attach any significance to it.

"i’m not going," vronsky answered gloomily.

"well, i must, i promised to. good-bye, then. if you do, come to the
stalls; you can take kruzin’s stall," added yashvin as he went out.

"no, i’m busy."

"a wife 
 
 ___________________________
 
is a care, but it’s worse when she’s not a wife," thought
yashvin, as he walked out of the hotel.

vronsky, left alone, got up from his chair and began pacing up and down
the room.

"and what’s today? the fourth night.... yegor and his wife are there,
and my mother, most likely. of course all petersburg’s there. now she’s
gone in, taken off her cloak and come into the light. tushkevitch,
yashvin, princess varvara," he pictured them to himself.... "what about
me? either that i’m frightened or have given up to tushkevitch the right
to protect her? from every point of view—stupid, stupid!... and why is
she putting me in such a position?" he said with a gesture of despair.

with that gesture he knocked against the table, on which there was
standing the seltzer water and the decanter of brandy, and almost upset
it. he tried to catch it, let it slip, and angrily kicked the table over
and
 
 ___________________________
 
rly cordial to him.

"what a pity you were not in time for the first act!"

vronsky, listening with one ear, moved his opera glass from the stalls
and scanned the boxes. near a lady in a turban and a bald old man, who
seemed to wave angrily in the moving opera glass, vronsky suddenly
caught sight of anna’s head, proud, strikingly beautiful, and smiling in
the frame of lace. she was in the fifth box, twenty paces from him. she
was sitting in front, and slightly turning, was saying something to
yashvin. the setting of her head on her handsome, broad shoulders, and
the restrained excitement and brilliance of her eyes and her whole face
reminded him of her just as he had seen her at the ball in moscow. but
he felt utterly different towards her beauty now. in his feeling for her
now there was no element of mystery, and so her beauty, though it
attracted him even more intensely than before, gave him now a sense of
injury. she was not looking in his direction, but vronsky felt that she
had seen hi
 
 ___________________________
 
m already.

when vronsky turned the opera glass again in that direction, he noticed
that princess varvara was particularly red, and kept laughing
unnaturally and looking round at the next box. anna, folding her fan and
tapping it on the red velvet, was gazing away and did not see, and
obviously did not wish to see, what was taking place in the next box.
yashvin’s face wore the expression which was common when he was losing
at cards. scowling, he sucked the left end of his mustache further and
further into his mouth, and cast sidelong glances at the next box.

in that box on the left were the kartasovs. vronsky knew them, and knew
that anna was acquainted with them. madame kartasova, a thin little
woman, was standing up in her box, and, her back turned upon anna, she
was putting on a mantle that her husband was holding for her. her face
was pale and 
 
 ___________________________
 
angry, and she was talking excitedly. kartasov, a fat, bald
man, was continually looking round at anna, while he attempted to soothe
his wife. when the wife had gone out, the husband lingered a long while,
and tried to catch anna’s eye, obviously anxious to bow to her. but
anna, with unmistakable intention, avoided noticing him, and talked to
yashvin, whose cropped head was bent down to her. kartasov went out
without making his salutation, and the box was left empty.

vronsky could not understand exactly what had passed between the
kartasovs and anna, but he saw that something humiliating for anna had
happened. he knew this both from what he had seen, and most of all from
the face of anna, who, he could see, was taxing every nerve to carry
through the part she had taken up. and in maintaining this attitude of
external composure she was comp
 
 ___________________________
 
 herself and him in such a false position, together with pity
for her suffering, filled his heart. he went down, and made straight for
anna’s box. at her box stood stremov, talking to her.

"there are no more tenors. _le moule en est brisé!_"

vronsky bowed to her and stopped to greet stremov.

"you came in late, i think, and have missed the best song," anna said to
vronsky, glancing ironically, he thought, at him.

"i am a poor judge of music," he said, looking sternly at her.

"like prince yashvin," she said smiling, "who considers that patti sings
too loud."

"thank you," she said, her little hand in its long glove taking the
playbill vronsky picked up, and suddenly at that instant her lovely face
quivered. she got up and went into the interior of the box.

noticing in the next act that her box was empty, vronsky, rousing
indignant "hushes" in the silent audience, went out in the middle of a
solo and drove home.

anna was already at home. when vronsky went up to her, she was in the
same
 
 ___________________________
 
; you’ve race horses too, haven’t you?"

"no, my father had; but i remember and know something about it."

"where have you dined?" asked stepan arkadyevitch.

"we were at the second table, behind the columns."

"we’ve been celebrating his success," said the tall colonel. "it’s his
second imperial prize. i wish i might have the luck at cards he has with
horses. well, why waste the precious time? i’m going to the ‘infernal
regions,’" added the colonel, and he walked away.

"that’s yashvin," vronsky said in answer to turovtsin, and he sat down
in the vacated seat beside them. he drank the glass offered him, and
ordered a bottle of wine. under the influence of the club atmosphere or
the wine he had drunk, levin chatted away to vronsky of the best breeds
of cattle, and was very glad not to feel the slightest hostility to this
man. he even told him, among other things, that he had heard from his
wife that she had met him at princess marya borissovna’s.

"ah, princess marya borisso
 
 ___________________________
 
 friends they met, levin and the prince walked
through all the rooms: the great room where tables had already been set,
and the usual partners were playing for small stakes; the divan room,
where they were playing chess, and sergey ivanovitch was sitting talking
to somebody; the billiard room, where, about a sofa in a recess, there
was a lively party drinking champagne—gagin was one of them. they peeped
into the "infernal regions," where a good many men were crowding round
one table, at which yashvin was sitting. trying not to make a noise,
they walked into the dark reading room, where under the shaded lamps
there sat a young man with a wrathful countenance, turning over one
journal after another, and a bald general buried in a book. they went,
too, into what the prince called the intellectual room, where three
gentlemen were engaged in a heated discussion of the latest political
news.

"prince, please come, we’re ready," said one of his card party, who had
come to look for him, and the p
 
 ___________________________
 
vin.

"waiter, a bottle of champagne," said stepan arkadyevitch.

"and i’m very glad," said vronsky.

but in spite of stepan arkadyevitch’s desire, and their own desire, they
had nothing to talk about, and both felt it.

"do you know, he has never met anna?" stepan arkadyevitch said to
vronsky. "and i want above everything to take him to see her. let us go,
levin!"

"really?" said vronsky. "she will be very glad to see you. i should be
going home at once," he added, "but i’m worried about yashvin, and i
want to stay on till he finishes."

"why, is he losing?"

"he keeps losing, and i’m the only friend that can restrain him."

"well, what do you say to pyramids? levin, will you play? capital!" said
stepan arkadyevitch. "get the table ready," he said to the marker.

"it has been ready a long while," answered the marker, who had already
set the balls in a triangle, and was knocking the red one about for his
own diversion.

"well, let us begin."

after the game vronsky and levin sat down 
 
 ___________________________
 
at gagin’s table, and at
stepan arkadyevitch’s suggestion levin took a hand in the game.

vronsky sat down at the table, surrounded by friends, who were
incessantly coming up to him. every now and then he went to the
"infernal" to keep an eye on yashvin. levin was enjoying a delightful
sense of repose after the mental fatigue of the morning. he was glad
that all hostility was at an end with vronsky, and the sense of peace,
decorum, and comfort never left him.

when the game was over, stepan arkadyevitch took levin’s arm.

"well, let us go to anna’s, then. at once? eh? she is at home. i
promised her long ago to bring you. where were you meaning to spend the
evening?"

"oh, nowhere specially. i promised sviazhsky to go to the society of
agri
 
 ___________________________
 
hey had in common, which had
made kitty able to love both. yet as soon as he was out of the room, she
ceased to think of him.

one thought, and one only, pursued her in different forms, and refused
to be shaken off. "if i have so much effect on others, on this man, who
loves his home and his wife, why is it _he_ is so cold to me?... not
cold exactly, he loves me, i know that! but something new is drawing us
apart now. why wasn’t he here all the evening? he told stiva to say he
could not leave yashvin, and must watch over his play. is yashvin a
child? but supposing it’s true. he never tells a lie. but there’s
something else in it if it’s true. he is glad of an opportunity of
showing me that he has other duties; i know that, i submit to that. but
why prove that to me? he wants to show me that his love for me is not to
interfere with his freedom. but i need no proofs, i need love. he ought
to understand all the bitterness of this life for me here in moscow. is
this life? i am not living,
 
 ___________________________
 
ant strife, she
blamed him for wanting to quarrel, but unconsciously put herself into an
attitude of antagonism.

"well, you’ve not been dull?" he said, eagerly and good-humoredly, going
up to her. "what a terrible passion it is—gambling!"

"no, i’ve not been dull; i’ve learned long ago not to be dull. stiva has
been here and levin."

"yes, they meant to come and see you. well, how did you like levin?" he
said, sitting down beside her.

"very much. they have not long been gone. what was yashvin doing?"

"he was winning—seventeen thousand. i got him away. he had really
started home, but he went back again, and now he’s losing."

"then what did you stay for?" she asked, suddenly lifting her eyes to
him. the expression of her face was cold and ungracious. "you told stiva
you were staying on to get yashvin away. and you have left him there."

the same expression of cold readiness for the conflict appeared on his
face too.

"in the first place, i did not ask him to give you any message
 
 ___________________________
 
ive answer in a day or two. but here it is; read it."

with trembling hands anna took the telegram, and read what vronsky had
told her. at the end was added: "little hope; but i will do everything
possible and impossible."

"i said yesterday that it’s absolutely nothing to me when i get, or
whether i never get, a divorce," she said, flushing crimson. "there was
not the slightest necessity to hide it from me." "so he may hide and
does hide his correspondence with women from me," she thought.

"yashvin meant to come this morning with voytov," said vronsky; "i
believe he’s won from pyevtsov all and more than he can pay, about sixty
thousand."

"no," she said, irritated by his so obviously showing by this change of
subject that he was irritated, "why did you suppose that this news would
affect me so, that you must even try to hide it? i said i don’t want to
consider it, and i should have liked you to care as little about it as i
do."

"i care about it because i like definiteness," he said.

 
 ___________________________
 
ing intently at him, at his face, his hands, she
recalled all the details of their reconciliation the previous day, and
his passionate caresses. "there, just such caresses he has lavished, and
will lavish, and longs to lavish on other women!" she thought.

"you don’t love your mother. that’s all talk, and talk, and talk!" she
said, looking at him with hatred in her eyes.

"even if so, you must..."

"must decide, and i have decided," she said, and she would have gone
away, but at that moment yashvin walked into the room. anna greeted him
and remained.

why, when there was a tempest in her soul, and she felt she was standing
at a turning point in her life, which might have fearful
consequences—why, at that minute, she had to keep up appearances before
an outsider, who sooner or later must know it all—she did not know. but
at once quelling the storm within her, she sat down and began talking to
their guest.

"well, how are you getting on? has your debt been paid you?" she asked
yashvin.

 
 ___________________________
 

"oh, pretty fair; i fancy i shan’t get it all, but i shall get a good
half. and when are you off?" said yashvin, looking at vronsky, and
unmistakably guessing at a quarrel.

"the day after tomorrow, i think," said vronsky.

"you’ve been meaning to go so long, though."

"but now it’s quite decided," said anna, looking vronsky straight in the
face with a look which told him not to dream of the possibility of
reconciliation.

"don’t you feel sorry for that unlucky pyevtsov?" she went on, talking
to yashvin.

"i’ve never asked myself the question, anna arkadyevna, whether i’m
sorry for him or not. 
 
 ___________________________
 
you see, all my fortune’s here"—he touched his
breast pocket—"and just now i’m a wealthy man. but today i’m going to
the club, and i may come out a beggar. you see, whoever sits down to
play with me—he wants to leave me without a shirt to my back, and so do
i him. and so we fight it out, and that’s the pleasure of it."

"well, but suppose you were married," said anna, "how would it be for
your wife?"

yashvin laughed.

"that’s why i’m not married, and never mean to be."

"and helsingfors?" said vronsky, entering into the conversation and
glancing at anna’s smiling face. meeting his eyes, anna’s face instantly
took a coldly severe expression as though she were saying to him: "it’s
not forgotten. it’s all the same."

"were you really in love?" she said to yashvin.

"oh heavens! ever so many times! but you see, some men can play but only
so that they can always lay down their cards when the
 
 ___________________________
 
him that when he comes," she thought and smiled. but the same instant
she remembered that she had no one now to tell anything amusing to. "and
there’s nothing amusing, nothing mirthful, really. it’s all hateful.
they’re singing for vespers, and how carefully that merchant crosses
himself! as if he were afraid of missing something. why these churches
and this singing and this humbug? simply to conceal that we all hate
each other like these cab drivers who are abusing each other so angrily.
yashvin says, ‘he wants to strip me of my shirt, and i him of his.’ yes,
that’s the truth!"

she was plunged in these thoughts, which so engrossed her that she left
off thinking of her own position, when the carriage drew up at the steps
of her house. it was only when she saw the porter running out to meet
her that she remembered she had sent the note and the telegram.

"is there an answer?" she inquired.

"i’ll see this minute," answered the porter, and glancing into his room,
he took out and 
 
 ___________________________
 
 crossly.

pyotr jumped on the box, and putting his arms akimbo, told the coachman
to drive to the booking-office.



chapter 30


"here it is again! again i understand it all!" anna said to herself, as
soon as the carriage had started and swaying lightly, rumbled over the
tiny cobbles of the paved road, and again one impression followed
rapidly upon another.

"yes; what was the last thing i thought of so clearly?" she tried to
recall it. "‘_tiutkin, coiffeur?_’—no, not that. yes, of what yashvin
says, the struggle for existence and hatred is the one thing that holds
men together. no, it’s a useless journey you’re making," she said,
mentally addressing a party in a coach and four, evidently going for an
excursion into the country. "and the dog you’re taking with you will be
no help to you. you can’t get away from yourselves." turning her eyes in
the direction pyotr had turned to look, she saw a factory hand almost
dead drunk, with hanging head, being led away by a policeman. "co
 
 ___________________________
 
eling. god forgive me, but
i can’t help hating the memory of her, when i look at my son’s misery!"

"but how is he now?"

"it was a blessing from providence for us—this servian war. i’m old, and
i don’t understand the rights and wrongs of it, but it’s come as a
providential blessing to him. of course for me, as his mother, it’s
terrible; and what’s worse, they say, _ce n’est pas très bien vu a
pétersbourg_. but it can’t be helped! it was the one thing that could
rouse him. yashvin—a friend of his—he had lost all he had at cards and
he was going to servia. he came to see him and persuaded him to go. now
it’s an interest for him. do please talk to him a little. i want to
distract his mind. he’s so low-spirited. and as bad luck would have it,
he has toothache too. but he’ll be delighted to see you. please do talk
to him; he’s walking up and down on that side."

sergey ivanovitch said he would be very glad to, and crossed over to the
other side of the station.


