
myakaya’s words "tell me about her." princess myakaya interrupted him
immediately, as she always did, and began talking herself.

"she’s done what they all do, except me—only they hide it. but she
wouldn’t be deceitful, and she did a fine thing. and she did better
still in throwing up that crazy brother-in-law of yours. you must excuse
me. everybody used to say he was so clever, so very clever; i was the
only one that said he was a fool. now that he’s so thick with lidia
ivanovna and landau, they all say he’s crazy, and i should prefer not to
agree with everybody, but this time i can’t help it."

"oh, do please explain," said stepan arkadyevitch; "what does it mean?
yesterday i was seeing him on my sister’s behalf, and i asked him to
give me a final answer. he gave me no answer, and said he would think it
over. but this morning, instead of an answer, i received an invitation
from countess lidia ivanovna for this evening."

"ah, so that’s it, that’s it!" said princess mya
 
 ___________________________
 
kaya gleefully, "they’re
going to ask landau what he’s to say."

"ask landau? what for? who or what’s landau?"

"what! you don’t know jules landau, _le fameux jules landau, le
clairvoyant_? he’s crazy too, but on him your sister’s fate depends. see
what comes of living in the provinces—you know nothing about anything.
landau, do you see, was a _commis_ in a shop in paris, and he went to a
doctor’s; and in the doctor’s waiting room he fell asleep, and in his
sleep he began giving advice to all the patients. and wonderful advice
it was! then the wife of yury meledinsky—you know, the invalid?—heard of
this landau, and had him to see her husband. and he cured her husband,
though i can’t say that i see he did him much good, for he’s just as
feeble a creature as ever he was, but they believed in him, and took
 
 ___________________________
 
 him
along with them and brought him to russia. here there’s been a general
rush to him, and he’s begun doctoring everyone. he cured countess
bezzubova, and she took such a fancy to him that she adopted him."

"adopted him?"

"yes, as her son. he’s not landau any more now, but count bezzubov.
that’s neither here nor there, though; but lidia—i’m very fond of her,
but she has a screw loose somewhere—has lost her heart to this landau
now, and nothing is settled now in her house or alexey alexandrovitch’s
without him, and so your sister’s fate is now in the hands of landau,
_alias_ count bezzubov."



chapter 21


after a capital dinner and a great deal of cognac drunk at
bartnyansky’s, stepan arkadyevitch, only a little later than the
appointed time, went in to countess lidia ivanovna’s.

"who else is with the countess?—a frenchman?" stepan arkadyevitch asked
the hall porter, as he glanced at the familiar overcoat
 
 ___________________________
 
wn and the lamps lighted. at a
round table under a lamp sat the countess and alexey alexandrovitch,
talking softly. a short, thinnish man, very pale and handsome, with
feminine hips and knock-kneed legs, with fine brilliant eyes and long
hair lying on the collar of his coat, was standing at the end of the
room gazing at the portraits on the wall. after greeting the lady of the
house and alexey alexandrovitch, stepan arkadyevitch could not resist
glancing once more at the unknown man.

"monsieur landau!" the countess addressed him with a softness and
caution that impressed oblonsky. and she introduced them.

landau looked round hurriedly, came up, and smiling, laid his moist,
lifeless hand in stepan arkadyevitch’s outstretched hand and immediately
walked away and fell to gazing at the portraits again. the countess and
alexey alexandrovitch looked at each other significantly.

"i am very glad to see you, particularly today," said countess lidia
ivanovna, pointing stepan arkadyevitch to a sea
 
 ___________________________
 
t beside karenin.

"i introduced you to him as landau," she said in a soft voice, glancing
at the frenchman and again immediately after at alexey alexandrovitch,
"but he is really count bezzubov, as you’re probably aware. only he does
not like the title."

"yes, i heard so," answered stepan arkadyevitch; "they say he completely
cured countess bezzubova."

"she was here today, poor thing!" the countess said, turning to alexey
alexandrovitch. "this separation is awful for her. it’s such a blow to
her!"

"and he positively is going?" queried alex
 
 ___________________________
 
 you are not doing so in the case of alexey
alexandrovitch. you understand what i mean?" she said, lifting her fine
pensive eyes.

"in part, countess, i understand the position of alexey
alexandrovitch..." said oblonsky. having no clear idea what they were
talking about, he wanted to confine himself to generalities.

"the change is not in his external position," countess lidia ivanovna
said sternly, following with eyes of love the figure of alexey
alexandrovitch as he got up and crossed over to landau; "his heart is
changed, a new heart has been vouchsafed him, and i fear you don’t fully
apprehend the change that has taken place in him."

"oh, well, in general outlines i can conceive the change. we have always
been friendly, and now..." said stepan arkadyevitch, responding with a
sympathetic glance to the expression of the countess, and mentally
balancing the question with which of the two ministers she was most
intimate, so as to know about which to ask her to speak for him.

"the change 
 
 ___________________________
 
lp one another."

"yes, undoubtedly so, but there is such a difference of convictions, and
besides..." said oblonsky with a soft smile.

"there can be no difference where it is a question of holy truth."

"oh, no, of course; but..." and stepan arkadyevitch paused in confusion.
he understood at last that they were talking of religion.

"i fancy he will fall asleep immediately," said alexey alexandrovitch in
a whisper full of meaning, going up to lidia ivanovna.

stepan arkadyevitch looked round. landau was sitting at the window,
leaning on his elbow and the back of his chair, his head drooping.
noticing that all eyes were turned on him he raised his head and smiled
a smile of childlike artlessness.

"don’t take any notice," said lidia ivanovna, and she lightly moved a
chair up for alexey alexandrovitch. "i have observed..." she was
beginning, when a footman came into the room with a letter. lidia
ivanovna rapidly ran her eyes over the note, and excusing herself, wrote
an answer with extraor
 
 ___________________________
 
xey alexandrovitch and lidia ivanovna looked at each other.

"we can never tell whether the time has come for us or not," said alexey
alexandrovitch severely. "we ought not to think whether we are ready or
not ready. god’s grace is not guided by human considerations: sometimes
it comes not to those that strive for it, and comes to those that are
unprepared, like saul."

"no, i believe it won’t be just yet," said lidia ivanovna, who had been
meanwhile watching the movements of the frenchman. landau got up and
came to them.

"do you allow me to listen?" he asked.

"oh, yes; i did not want to disturb you," said lidia ivanovna, gazing
tenderly at him; "sit here with us."

"one has only not to close one’s eyes to shut out the light," alexey
alexandrovitch went on.

"ah, if you knew the happiness we know, feeling his presence ever in our
hearts!" said countess lidia ivanovna with a rapturous smile.

"but a man may feel himself unworthy sometimes to rise to that height,"
said stepan arkadyevi
 
 ___________________________
 
 child. she was in despair. and
what happened? she found this comforter, and she thanks god now for the
death of her child. such is the happiness faith brings!"

"oh, yes, that is most..." said stepan arkadyevitch, glad they were
going to read, and let him have a chance to collect his faculties. "no,
i see i’d better not ask her about anything today," he thought. "if only
i can get out of this without putting my foot in it!"

"it will be dull for you," said countess lidia ivanovna, addressing
landau; "you don’t know english, but it’s short."

"oh, i shall understand," said landau, with the same smile, and he
closed his eyes. alexey alexandrovitch and lidia ivanovna exchanged
meaningful glances, and the reading began.



chapter 22


stepan arkadyevitch felt completely nonplussed by the strange talk which
he was hearing for the first time. the complexity of petersburg, as a
rule, had a stimulating effect on him, rousing him out of his moscow
stagnation. but he liked these complications,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and understood them only
in the circles he knew and was at home in. in these unfamiliar
surroundings he was puzzled and disconcerted, and could not get his
bearings. as he listened to countess lidia ivanovna, aware of the
beautiful, artless—or perhaps artful, he could not decide which—eyes of
landau fixed upon him, stepan arkadyevitch began to be conscious of a
peculiar heaviness in his head.

the most incongruous ideas were in confusion in his head. "marie sanina
is glad her child’s dead.... how good a smoke would be now!... to be
saved, one need only believe, and the monks don’t know how the thing’s
to be done, but countess lidia ivanovna does know.... and why is my head
so heavy? is it the cognac, or all this being so queer? anyway, i fancy
i’ve done nothing unsuitable so far. b
 
 ___________________________
 
ut anyway, it won’t do to ask her
now. they say they make one say one’s prayers. i only hope they won’t
make me! that’ll be too imbecile. and what stuff it is she’s reading!
but she has a good accent. landau—bezzubov—what’s he bezzubov for?" all
at once stepan arkadyevitch became aware that his lower jaw was
uncontrollably forming a yawn. he pulled his whiskers to cover the yawn,
and shook himself together. but soon after he became aware that he was
dropping asleep and on the very point of snoring. he recovered himself
at the very moment when the voice of countess lidia ivanovna was saying
"he’s asleep." stepan arkadyevitch started with dismay, feeling guilty
and caught. but he was reassure
 
 ___________________________
 
d at once by seeing that the words "he’s
asleep" referred not to him, but to landau. the frenchman was asleep as
well as stepan arkadyevitch. but stepan arkadyevitch’s being asleep
would have offended them, as he thought (though even this, he thought,
might not be so, as everything seemed so queer), while landau’s being
asleep delighted them extremely, especially countess lidia ivanovna.

_"mon ami,"_ said lidia ivanovna, carefully holding the folds of her
silk gown so as not to rustle, and in her excitement calling karenin not
alexey alexandrovitch, but _"mon ami," "donnez-lui la main. vous voyez?
sh!"_ she hissed at the footman as he came in again. "not at home."

the frenchman was asleep, or pretending to be asleep, with his head on
the back of his chair, and his moist hand, as it lay on his knee,