in people in the most
favorable light possible, especially so in those she did not know. and
now as she made surmises as to who people were, what were their
relations to one another, and what they were like, kitty endowed them
with the most marvelous and noble characters, and found confirmation of
her idea in her observations.

of these people the one that attracted her most was a russian girl who
had come to the watering-place with an invalid russian lady, madame
stahl, as everyone called her. madame stahl belonged to the highest
society, but she was so ill that she could not walk, and only on
exceptionally fine days made her appearance at the springs in an invalid
carriage. but it was not so much from ill-health as from pride—so
princess shtcherbatskaya interpreted it—that madame stahl had not made
the acquaintance of anyone among the russians there. the russian girl
looked after madame stahl, and besides that, she was, as kitty observed,
on friendly terms with all the invalids who were seri
 
 ___________________________
 
ously ill, and
there were many of them at the springs, and looked after them in the
most natural way. this russian girl was not, as kitty gathered, related
to madame stahl, nor was she a paid attendant. madame stahl called her
varenka, and other people called her "mademoiselle varenka." apart from
the interest kitty took in this girl’s relations with madame stahl and
with other unknown persons, kitty, as often happened, felt an
inexplicable attraction to mademoiselle varenka, and was aware when
their eyes met that she too liked her.

of mademoiselle varenka one would not say that she had passed her first
youth, but she was, as it were, a creature without youth; she might have
been taken for nineteen or for thirty. if her features were criticized
separately, she was handsome rather than plain, in spite of the sickly
hue of her face. she would have been a
 
 ___________________________
 
of the
arcade with a blind frenchwoman, and, every time she met kitty, they
exchanged friendly glances.

"mamma, couldn’t i speak to her?" said kitty, watching her unknown
friend, and noticing that she was going up to the spring, and that they
might come there together.

"oh, if you want to so much, i’ll find out about her first and make her
acquaintance myself," answered her mother. "what do you see in her out
of the way? a companion, she must be. if you like, i’ll make
acquaintance with madame stahl; i used to know her _belle-soeur_," added
the princess, lifting her head haughtily.

kitty knew that the princess was offended that madame stahl had seemed
to avoid making her acquaintance. kitty did not insist.

"how wonderfully sweet she is!" she said, gazing at varenka just as she
handed a glass to the frenchwoman. "look how natural and sweet it all
is."

"it’s so funny to see your _engouements_," said the princess. "no, we’d
better go back," she added, noticing levin coming towards them
 
 ___________________________
 
 her unknown friend, kitty noticed that
mademoiselle varenka was already on the same terms with levin and his
companion as with her other _protégés_. she went up to them, entered
into conversation with them, and served as interpreter for the woman,
who could not speak any foreign language.

kitty began to entreat her mother still more urgently to let her make
friends with varenka. and, disagreeable as it was to the princess to
seem to take the first step in wishing to make the acquaintance of
madame stahl, who thought fit to give herself airs, she made inquiries
about varenka, and, having ascertained particulars about her tending to
prove that there could be no harm though little good in the
acquaintance, she herself approached varenka and made acquaintance with
her.

choosing a time when her daughter had gone to the spring, while varenka
had stopped outside the baker’s, the princess went up to her.

"allow me to make your acquaintance," she said, with her dignified
smile. "my daughter has los
 
 ___________________________
 
gh rather
mournful smile, that showed large but handsome teeth.

"i have long wished for this too," she said.

"but you are so busy."

"oh, no, i’m not at all busy," answered varenka, but at that moment she
had to leave her new friends because two little russian girls, children
of an invalid, ran up to her.

"varenka, mamma’s calling!" they cried.

and varenka went after them.



chapter 32


the particulars which the princess had learned in regard to varenka’s
past and her relations with madame stahl were as follows:

madame stahl, of whom some people said that she had worried her husband
out of his life, while others said it was he who had made her wretched
by his immoral behavior, had always been a woman of weak health and
enthusiastic temperament. when, after her separation from her husband,
she gave birth to her only child, the child had died almost immediately,
and the family of madame stahl, knowing her sensibility, and fearing the
news would kill her, had substituted another child, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 baby born the same
night and in the same house in petersburg, the daughter of the chief
cook of the imperial household. this was varenka. madame stahl learned
later on that varenka was not her own child, but she went on bringing
her up, especially as very soon afterwards varenka had not a relation of
her own living. madame stahl had now been living more than ten years
continuously abroad, in the south, never leaving her couch. and some
people said that madame stahl had made her social position as a
philanthropic, highly religious woman; other people said she really was
at heart the highly ethical being, living for nothing but the good of
her fellow creatures, which she represented herself to be. no one knew
what her faith was—catholic, protestant, or orthodox. but one fact was
indubitable—she was in amicable relations with the highest dignitaries
of all the churches and sects.

varenka lived with her all the while abroad, and everyone who knew
madame 
 
 ___________________________
 
stahl knew and liked mademoiselle varenka, as everyone called
her.

having learned all these facts, the princess found nothing to object to
in her daughter’s intimacy with varenka, more especially as varenka’s
breeding and education were of the best—she spoke french and english
extremely well—and what was of the most weight, brought a message from
madame stahl expressing her regret that she was prevented by her ill
health from making the acquaintance of the princess.

after getting to know varenka, kitty became more and more fascinated by
her friend, and every day she discovered new virtues in her.

the princess, hearing that varenka had a good voice, asked her to come
and sing to them in the evening.

"kitty plays, and we have a piano; not a good one, it’s true, but you
will give us so much pleasure," said the princess with her affected
smile, whi
 
 ___________________________
 
enka could hardly restrain a smile at the idea that
she needed an escort.

"no, i always go about alone and nothing ever happens to me," she said,
taking her hat. and kissing kitty once more, without saying what was
important, she stepped out courageously with the music under her arm and
vanished into the twilight of the summer night, bearing away with her
her secret of what was important and what gave her the calm and dignity
so much to be envied.



chapter 33


kitty made the acquaintance of madame stahl too, and this acquaintance,
together with her friendship with varenka, did not merely exercise a
great influence on her, it also comforted her in her mental distress.
she found this comfort through a completely new world being opened to
her by means of this acquaintance, a world having nothing in common with
her past, an exalted, noble world, from the height of which she could
contemplate her past calmly. it was revealed to her that besides the
instinctive life to which kitty had given herself 
 
 ___________________________
 
 religion
having nothing in common with that one which kitty had known from
childhood, and which found expression in litanies and all-night services
at the widow’s home, where one might meet one’s friends, and in learning
by heart slavonic texts with the priest. this was a lofty, mysterious
religion connected with a whole series of noble thoughts and feelings,
which one could do more than merely believe because one was told to,
which one could love.

kitty found all this out not from words. madame stahl talked to kitty as
to a charming child that one looks on with pleasure as on the memory of
one’s youth, and only once she said in passing that in all human sorrows
nothing gives comfort but love and faith, and that in the sight of
christ’s compassion for us no sorrow is trifling—and immediately talked
of other things. but in every gesture of madame stahl, in every word, in
every heavenly—as kitty called it—look, and above all in the whole story
of her life, which she heard from varenk
 
 ___________________________
 
a, kitty recognized that
something "that was important," of which, till then, she had known
nothing.

yet, elevated as madame stahl’s character was, touching as was her
story, and exalted and moving as was her speech, kitty could not help
detecting in her some traits which perplexed her. she noticed that when
questioning her about her family, madame stahl had smiled
contemptuously, which was not in accord with christian meekness. she
noticed, too, that when she had found a catholic priest with her, madame
stahl had studiously kept her face in the shadow of the lamp-shade and
had smiled in a peculiar way. trivial as these two observations were,
they perplexed her, and she had her doubts as to madame stahl. but on
the other hand varenka, alone in the world, without friends or
relations, with a melancholy disappointment in the past, desiring
nothin
 
 ___________________________
 
g, regretting nothing, was just that perfection of which kitty
dared hardly dream. in varenka she realized that one has but to forget
oneself and love others, and one will be calm, happy, and noble. and
that was what kitty longed to be. seeing now clearly what was _the most
important_, kitty was not satisfied with being enthusiastic over it; she
at once gave herself up with her whole soul to the new life that was
opening to her. from varenka’s accounts of the doings of madame stahl
and other people whom she mentioned, kitty had already constructed the
plan of her own future life. she would, like madame stahl’s niece,
aline, of whom varenka had talked to her a great deal, seek out those
who were in trouble, wherever she might be living, help them as far as
she could, give them the gospel, read the gospel to the sick, to
criminals, to the dying. the idea of reading the gospel to criminals, as
aline did, particularly fascinated kitty. but all these were secret
dreams, of w
 
 ___________________________
 
hich kitty did not talk either to her mother or to varenka.

while awaiting the time for carrying out her plans on a large scale,
however, kitty, even then at the springs, where there were so many
people ill and unhappy, readily found a chance for practicing her new
principles in imitation of varenka.

at first the princess noticed nothing but that kitty was much under the
influence of her _engouement_, as she called it, for madame stahl, and
still more for varenka. she saw that kitty did not merely imitate
varenka in her conduct, but unconsciously imitated her in her manner of
walking, of talking, of blinking her eyes. but later on the princess
noticed that, apart from this adoration, some kind of serious spiritual
change was taking place in her daughter.

the princess saw that in the evenings kitty read a french testament that
madame stahl had given her—a thing she had never done before; that she
avoided society acquaintanc
 
 ___________________________
 
man; and so she was
affected, which did not altogether suit her. the prince, on the
contrary, thought everything foreign detestable, got sick of european
life, kept to his russian habits, and purposely tried to show himself
abroad less european than he was in reality.

the prince returned thinner, with the skin hanging in loose bags on his
cheeks, but in the most cheerful frame of mind. his good humor was even
greater when he saw kitty completely recovered. the news of kitty’s
friendship with madame stahl and varenka, and the reports the princess
gave him of some kind of change she had noticed in kitty, troubled the
prince and aroused his habitual feeling of jealousy of everything that
drew his daughter away from him, and a dread that his daughter might
have got out of the reach of his influence into regions inaccessible to
him. but these unpleasant matters were all drowned in the sea of
kindliness and good humor which was always within him, and more so than
ever since his course of carlsbad wat
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the doctor advised her to go out. i’m taking her her work."

"so that’s angel number one?" said the prince when varenka had gone on.

kitty saw that her father had meant to make fun of varenka, but that he
could not do it because he liked her.

"come, so we shall see all your friends," he went on, "even madame
stahl, if she deigns to recognize me."

"why, did you know her, papa?" kitty asked apprehensively, catching the
gleam of irony that kindled in the prince’s eyes at the mention of
madame stahl.

"i used to know her husband, and her too a little, before she’d joined
the pietists."

"what is a pietist, papa?" asked kitty, dismayed to find that what she
prized so highly in madame stahl had a name.

"i don’t quite know myself. i only know that she thanks god for
everything, for every misfortune, and thanks god too that her husband
died. and that’s rather droll, as they didn’t get on together."

"who’s that? what a piteous face!" he asked, noticing a sick man of
medium height si
 
 ___________________________
 
ht we weren’t going," his wife answered
crossly.

"what, when...." he coughed and waved his hand. the prince took off his
hat and moved away with his daughter.

"ah! ah!" he sighed deeply. "oh, poor things!"

"yes, papa," answered kitty. "and you must know they’ve three children,
no servant, and scarcely any means. he gets something from the academy,"
she went on briskly, trying to drown the distress that the queer change
in anna pavlovna’s manner to her had aroused in her.

"oh, here’s madame stahl," said kitty, indicating an invalid carriage,
where, propped on pillows, something in gray and blue was lying under a
sunshade. this was madame stahl. behind her stood the gloomy,
healthy-looking german workman who pushed the carriage. close by was
standing a flaxen-headed swedish count, whom kitty knew by name. several
invalids were lingering near the low carriage, staring at the lady as
though she were some curiosity.

the prince went up to her, and kitty detected that disconcerting gleam
of 
 
 ___________________________
 
irony in his eyes. he went up to madame stahl, and addressed her with
extreme courtesy and affability in that excellent french that so few
speak nowadays.

"i don’t know if you remember me, but i must recall myself to thank you
for your kindness to my daughter," he said, taking off his hat and not
putting it on again.

"prince alexander shtcherbatsky," said madame stahl, lifting upon him
her heavenly eyes, in which kitty discerned a look of annoyance.
"delighted! i have taken a great fancy to your daughter."

"you are still in weak health?"

"yes; i’m used to it," said madame stahl, and she introduced the prince
to the swedish count.

"you are scarcely changed at all," the prince said to her. "it’s ten or
eleven years since i had the honor of seeing you."

"yes; god sends the cross and sends the strength to bear it. often one
wonders what is the goal of th
 
 ___________________________
 
is life?... the other side!" she said
angrily to varenka, who had rearranged the rug over her feet not to her
satisfaction.

"to do good, probably," said the prince with a twinkle in his eye.

"that is not for us to judge," said madame stahl, perceiving the shade
of expression on the prince’s face. "so you will send me that book, dear
count? i’m very grateful to you," she said to the young swede.

"ah!" cried the prince, catching sight of the moscow colonel standing
near, and with a bow to madame stahl he walked away with his daughter
and the moscow colonel, who joined them.

"that’s our aristocracy, prince!" the moscow colonel said with ironical
intention. he cherished a grudge against madame stahl for not making his
acquaintance.

"she’s just the same," replied the prince.

"did you know her before her illness, prince—that’s to say before she
took to her bed?"

"yes. she took to her bed before my eyes," said the prince.

"they say it’s ten years since she has stood on her feet."


 
 ___________________________
 
nows her and aline stahl."

"perhaps so," said the prince, squeezing her hand with his elbow; "but
it’s better when one does good so that you may ask everyone and no one
knows."

kitty did not answer, not because she had nothing to say, but because
she did not care to reveal her secret thoughts even to her father. but,
strange to say, although she had so made up her mind not to be
influenced by her father’s views, not to let him into her inmost
sanctuary, she felt that the heavenly image of madame stahl, which she
had carried for a whole month in her heart, had vanished, never to
return, just as the fantastic figure made up of some clothes thrown down
at random vanishes when one sees that it is only some garment lying
there. all that was left was a woman with short legs, who lay down
because she had a bad figure, and worried patient varenka for not
arranging her rug to her liking. and by no effort of the imagination
could kitty bring back the former madame stahl.



chapter 35


the prince com
 
 ___________________________
 
sake, do explain to me,
sergey ivanovitch, where are all those volunteers going, whom are they
fighting with?" asked the old prince, unmistakably taking up a
conversation that had sprung up in levin’s absence.

"with the turks," sergey ivanovitch answered, smiling serenely, as he
extricated the bee, dark with honey and helplessly kicking, and put it
with the knife on a stout aspen leaf.

"but who has declared war on the turks?—ivan ivanovitch ragozov and
countess lidia ivanovna, assisted by madame stahl?"

"no one has declared war, but people sympathize with their neighbors’
sufferings and are eager to help them," said sergey ivanovitch.

"but the prince is not speaking of help," said levin, coming to the
assistance of his father-in-law, "but of war. the prince says that
private persons cannot take part in war without the permission of the
government."

"kostya, mind, that’s a bee! really, they’ll sting us!" said dolly,
waving away a wasp.

"but that’s not a bee, it’s a wasp," said l