fidences.

"is this grisha? heavens, how he’s grown!" said anna; and kissing him,
never taking her eyes off dolly, she stood still and flushed a little.
"no, please, let us stay here."

she took off her kerchief and her hat, and catching it in a lock of her
black hair, which was a mass of curls, she tossed her head and shook her
hair down.

"you are radiant with health and happiness!" said dolly, almost with
envy.

"i?.... yes," said anna. "merciful heavens, tanya! you’re the same age
as my seryozha," she added, addressing the little girl as she ran in.
she took her in her arms and kissed her. "delightful child, delightful!
show me them all."

she mentioned them, not only remembering the names, but the years,
months, characters, illnesses of all the children, and dolly could not
but appreciate that.

"very well, we will go to them," she said. "it’s a pity vassya’s
asleep."

after seeing the children, they sat down, alone now, in the drawing
room, to coffee. anna took the tray, and then
 
 ___________________________
 
adyevitch was happy and cheerful, but not
so as to seem as though, having been forgiven, he had forgotten his
offense.

at half-past nine o’clock a particularly joyful and pleasant family
conversation over the tea-table at the oblonskys’ was broken up by an
apparently simple incident. but this simple incident for some reason
struck everyone as strange. talking about common acquaintances in
petersburg, anna got up quickly.

"she is in my album," she said; "and, by the way, i’ll show you my
seryozha," she added, with a mother’s smile of pride.

towards ten o’clock, when she usually said good-night to her son, and
often before going to a ball put him to bed herself, she felt depressed
at being so far from him; and whatever she was talking about, she kept
coming back in thought to her curly-headed seryozha. she longed to look
at his photograph and talk of him. seizing the first pretext, she got
up, and with her light, resolute step went for her album. the stairs up
to her room came out o
 
 ___________________________
 
 said anna, kissing her and hiding her tears.

"you understood me, and you understand. good-bye, my darling!"



chapter 29


"come, it’s all over, and thank god!" was the first thought that came to
anna arkadyevna, when she had said good-bye for the last time to her
brother, who had stood blocking up the entrance to the carriage till the
third bell rang. she sat down on her lounge beside annushka, and looked
about her in the twilight of the sleeping-carriage. "thank god! tomorrow
i shall see seryozha and alexey alexandrovitch, and my life will go on
in the old way, all nice and as usual."

still in the same anxious frame of mind, as she had been all that day,
anna took pleasure in arranging herself for the journey with great care.
with her little deft hands she opened and shut her little red bag, took
out a cushion, laid it on her knees, and carefully wrapping up her feet,
settled herself comfortably. an invalid lady had already lain down to
sleep. two other ladies began talking to anna, an
 
 ___________________________
 
liar feeling, like a
consciousness of hypocrisy, which she experienced in her relations with
her husband. but hitherto she had not taken note of the feeling, now she
was clearly and painfully aware of it.

"yes, as you see, your tender spouse, as devoted as the first year after
marriage, burned with impatience to see you," he said in his deliberate,
high-pitched voice, and in that tone which he almost always took with
her, a tone of jeering at anyone who should say in earnest what he said.

"is seryozha quite well?" she asked.

"and is this all the reward," said he, "for my ardor? he’s quite
well..."



chapter 31


vronsky had not even tried to sleep all that night. he sat in his
armchair, looking straight before him or scanning the people who got in
and out. if he had indeed on previous occasions struck and impressed
people who did not know him by his air of unhesitating composure, he
seemed now more haughty and self-possessed than ever. he looked at
people as if they were things. a nervou
 
 ___________________________
 
 coldly. "on mondays we’re at home. most fortunate,"
he said to his wife, dismissing vronsky altogether, "that i should just
have half an hour to meet you, so that i can prove my devotion," he went
on in the same jesting tone.

"you lay too much stress on your devotion for me to value it much," she
responded in the same jesting tone, involuntarily listening to the sound
of vronsky’s steps behind them. "but what has it to do with me?" she
said to herself, and she began asking her husband how seryozha had got
on without her.

"oh, capitally! mariette says he has been very good, and ... i must
disappoint you ... but he has not missed you as your husband has. but
once more _merci,_ my dear, for giving me a day. our dear _samovar_ will
be delighted." (he used to call the countess lidia ivanovna, well known
in society, a samovar, because she was always bubbling over with
excitement.) "she has been continually asking after you. and, do you
know, if i may venture to advise you, you should go and s
 
 ___________________________
 

eyes, and his plump, graceful little legs in tightly pulled-up
stockings. anna experienced almost physical pleasure in the sensation of
his nearness, and his caresses, and moral soothing, when she met his
simple, confiding, and loving glance, and heard his naïve questions.
anna took out the presents dolly’s children had sent him, and told her
son what sort of little girl was tanya at moscow, and how tanya could
read, and even taught the other children.

"why, am i not so nice as she?" asked seryozha.

"to me you’re nicer than anyone in the world."

"i know that," said seryozha, smiling.

anna had not had time to drink her coffee when the countess lidia
ivanovna was announced. the countess lidia ivanovna was a tall, stout
woman, with an unhealthily sallow face and splendid, pensive black eyes.
anna liked her, but today she seemed to be seeing her for the first time
with all her defects.

"well, my dear, so you took the olive branch?" inquired countess lidia
ivanovna, as soon as she came i
 
 ___________________________
 
ho sees by the
compass that the direction in which he is swiftly moving is far from the
right one, but that to arrest his motion is not in his power, that every
instant is carrying him further and further away, and that to admit to
himself his deviation from the right direction is the same as admitting
his certain ruin.

this child, with his innocent outlook upon life, was the compass that
showed them the point to which they had departed from what they knew,
but did not want to know.

this time seryozha was not at home, and she was completely alone. she
was sitting on the terrace waiting for the return of her son, who had
gone out for his walk and been caught in the rain. she had sent a
manservant and a maid out to look for him. dressed in a white gown,
deeply embroidered, she was sitting in a corner of the terrace behind
some flowers, and did not hear him. bending her curly black head, she
pressed her forehead against a cool watering pot that stood on the
parapet, and both her lovely hands, w
 
 ___________________________
 
s the matter? you are ill?" he said to her in french, going up to
her. he would have run to her, but remembering that there might be
spectators, he looked round towards the balcony door, and reddened a
little, as he always reddened, feeling that he had to be afraid and be
on his guard.

"no, i’m quite well," she said, getting up and pressing his outstretched
hand tightly. "i did not expect ... thee."

"mercy! what cold hands!" he said.

"you startled me," she said. "i’m alone, and expecting seryozha; he’s
out for a walk; they’ll come in from this side."

but, in spite of her efforts to be calm, her lips were quivering.

"forgive me for coming, but i couldn’t pass the day without seeing you,"
he went on, speaking french, as he always did to avoid using the stiff
russian plural form, so impossibly frigid between them, and the
dangerously intimate singular.

"forgive you? i’m so glad!"

"but you’re ill or worried," he went on, not letting go her hands and
bending over her. "what wer
 
 ___________________________
 
glowed with the fire he knew so well; with a rapid movement she raised
her lovely hands, covered with rings, took his head, looked a long look
into his face, and, putting up her face with smiling, parted lips,
swiftly kissed his mouth and both eyes, and pushed him away. she would
have gone, but he held her back.

"when?" he murmured in a whisper, gazing in ecstasy at her.

"tonight, at one o’clock," she whispered, and, with a heavy sigh, she
walked with her light, swift step to meet her son.

seryozha had been caught by the rain in the big garden, and he and his
nurse had taken shelter in an arbor.

"well, _au revoir_," she said to vronsky. "i must soon be getting ready
for the races. betsy promised to fetch me."

vronsky, looking at his watch, went away hurriedly.



chapter 24


when vronsky looked at his watch on the karenins’ balcony, he was so
greatly agitated and lost in his thoughts that he saw the figures on the
watch’s face, but could not take in what time it was. he came out on
 
 ___________________________
 
ehood
prompted her to utter; "and now we’ll go together. only it’s a pity i’ve
promised betsy. she’s coming for me."

alexey alexandrovitch knit his brows at betsy’s name.

"oh, i’m not going to separate the inseparables," he said in his usual
bantering tone. "i’m going with mihail vassilievitch. i’m ordered
exercise by the doctors too. i’ll walk, and fancy myself at the springs
again."

"there’s no hurry," said anna. "would you like tea?"

she rang.

"bring in tea, and tell seryozha that alexey alexandrovitch is here.
well, tell me, how have you been? mihail vassilievitch, you’ve not been
to see me before. look how lovely it is out on the terrace," she said,
turning first to one and then to the other.

she spoke very simply and naturally, but too much and too fast. she was
the more aware of this from noticing in the inquisitive look mihail
vassilievitch turned on her that he was, as it were, keeping watch on
her.

mihail vassilievitch promptly went out on the terrace.

s
 
 ___________________________
 
 doing, and
tried to persuade him to take a rest and come out to her.

all this she said brightly, rapidly, and with a peculiar brilliance in
her eyes. but alexey alexandrovitch did not now attach any special
significance to this tone of hers. he heard only her words and gave them
only the direct sense they bore. and he answered simply, though
jestingly. there was nothing remarkable in all this conversation, but
never after could anna recall this brief scene without an agonizing pang
of shame.

seryozha came in preceded by his governess. if alexey alexandrovitch had
allowed himself to observe he would have noticed the timid and
bewildered eyes with which seryozha glanced first at his father and then
at his mother. but he would not see anything, and he did not see it.

"ah, the young man! he’s grown. really, he’s getting quite a man. how
are you, young man?"

and he gave his hand to the scared child. seryozha had been shy of his
father before, and now, ever since alexey alexandrovitch had t
 
 ___________________________
 
aken to
calling him young man, and since that insoluble question had occurred to
him whether vronsky were a friend or a foe, he avoided his father. he
looked round towards his mother as though seeking shelter. it was only
with his mother that he was at ease. meanwhile, alexey alexandrovitch
was holding his son by the shoulder while he was speaking to the
governess, and seryozha was so miserably uncomfortable that anna saw he
was on the point of tears.

anna, who had flushed a little the instant her son came in, noticing
that seryozha was uncomfortable, got up hurriedly, took alexey
alexandrovitch’s hand from her son’s shoulder, and kissing the boy, led
him out onto the terrace, and quickly came back.

"it’s time to start, though," said she, glancing at her watch. "how is
it betsy doesn’t come?..."

"yes," said alexey alexandrovitch, and getting up, he folded h
 
 ___________________________
 
 times what it was she feared, and what she hoped for.
whether she feared or desired what had happened, or what was going to
happen, and exactly what she longed for, she could not have said.

"ah, what am i doing!" she said to herself, feeling a sudden thrill of
pain in both sides of her head. when she came to herself, she saw that
she was holding her hair in both hands, each side of her temples, and
pulling it. she jumped up, and began walking about.

"the coffee is ready, and mademoiselle and seryozha are waiting," said
annushka, coming back again and finding anna in the same position.

"seryozha? what about seryozha?" anna asked, with sudden eagerness,
recollecting her son’s existence for the first time that morning.

"he’s been naughty, i think," answered annushka with a smile.

"in what way?"

"some peaches were lying on the table in the corner room. i think he
slipped in and ate one of them on the sly."

the recollection of her son suddenly roused anna from the helpless
condition in 
 
 ___________________________
 
quickly as
possible, she must take action before he was taken from her. she must
take her son and go away. here was the one thing she had to do now. she
needed consolation. she must be calm, and get out of this insufferable
position. the thought of immediate action binding her to her son, of
going away somewhere with him, gave her this consolation.

she dressed quickly, went downstairs, and with resolute steps walked
into the drawing room, where she found, as usual, waiting for her, the
coffee, seryozha, and his governess. seryozha, all in white, with his
back and head bent, was standing at a table under a looking-glass, and
with an expression of intense concentration which she knew well, and in
which he resembled his father, he was doing something to the flowers he
carried.

the governess had a particularly severe expression. seryozha screamed
shrilly, as he often did, "ah, mamma!" and stopped, hesitating whether
to go to greet his mother and put down the flowers, or to finish making
the wrea
 
 ___________________________
 
th and go with the flowers.

the governess, after saying good-morning, began a long and detailed
account of seryozha’s naughtiness, but anna did not hear her; she was
considering whether she would take her with her or not. "no, i won’t
take her," she decided. "i’ll go alone with my child."

"yes, it’s very wrong," said anna, and taking her son by the shoulder
she looked at him, not severely, but with a timid glance that bewildered
and delighted the boy, and she kissed him. "leave him to me," she said
to the astonished governess, and not letting go of her son, she sat down
at the table, where coffee wa
 
 ___________________________
 
s set ready for her.

"mamma! i ... i ... didn’t..." he said, trying to make out from her
expression what was in store for him in regard to the peaches.

"seryozha," she said, as soon as the governess had left the room, "that
was wrong, but you’ll never do it again, will you?... you love me?"

she felt that the tears were coming into her eyes. "can i help loving
him?" she said to herself, looking deeply into his scared and at the
same time delighted eyes. "and can he ever join his father in punishing
me? is it possible he will not feel for me?" tears were already flowing
down her face, and to hide them she got up abruptly and almost ran out
on to the te
 
 ___________________________
 
rrace.

after the thunder showers of the last few days, cold, bright weather had
set in. the air was cold in the bright sun that filtered through the
freshly washed leaves.

she shivered, both from the cold and from the inward horror which had
clutched her with fresh force in the open air.

"run along, run along to mariette," she said to seryozha, who had
followed her out, and she began walking up and down on the straw matting
of the terrace. "can it be that they won’t forgive me, won’t understand
how it all couldn’t be helped?" she said to herself.

standing still, and looking at the tops of the aspen trees waving in the
wind, with their freshly washed, brightly shining leaves in the cold
sunshine, she knew that they would not forgive her, that everyone and
everything would be merciless to her now as was that sky, that green.
and
 
 ___________________________
 
 again she felt that everything was split in two in her soul. "i
mustn’t, mustn’t think," she said to herself. "i must get ready. to go
where? when? whom to take with me? yes, to moscow by the evening train.
annushka and seryozha, and only the most necessary things. but first i
must write to them both." she went quickly indoors into her boudoir, sat
down at the table, and wrote to her husband:—"after what has happened, i
cannot remain any longer in your house. i am going away, and taking my
son with me. i don’t know the law, and so i don’t know with which of the
parents the son should remain; but i take him with me because i cannot
live without him. be generous, leave him to me."

up to this point she wrote rapidl
 
 ___________________________
 
hem at her
forehead and hair. he went up to her, took her by the hand, and asked
her to sit down.

"i am very glad you have come," he said, sitting down beside her, and
obviously wishing to say something, he stuttered. several times he tried
to begin to speak, but stopped. in spite of the fact that, preparing
herself for meeting him, she had schooled herself to despise and
reproach him, she did not know what to say to him, and she felt sorry
for him. and so the silence lasted for some time. "is seryozha quite
well?" he said, and not waiting for an answer, he added: "i shan’t be
dining at home today, and i have got to go out directly."

"i had thought of going to moscow," she said.

"no, you did quite, quite right to come," he said, and was silent again.

seeing that he was powerless to begin the conversation, she began
herself.

"alexey alexandrovitch," she said, looking at him and not dropping her
eyes under his persistent gaze at her hair, "i’m a guilty woman, i’m a
bad woman, but i am
 
 ___________________________
 
an a man with those dull eyes, with that self-satisfied complacency,
feel anything?"

"i cannot change anything," she whispered.

"i have come to tell you that i am going tomorrow to moscow, and shall
not return again to this house, and you will receive notice of what i
decide through the lawyer into whose hands i shall intrust the task of
getting a divorce. my son is going to my sister’s," said alexey
alexandrovitch, with an effort recalling what he had meant to say about
his son.

"you take seryozha to hurt me," she said, looking at him from under her
brows. "you do not love him.... leave me seryozha!"

"yes, i have lost even my affection for my son, because he is associated
with the repulsion i feel for you. but still i shall take him. goodbye!"

and he was going away, but now she detained him.

"alexey alexandrovitch, leave me seryozha!" she whispered once more. "i
have nothing else to say. leave seryozha till my ... i shall soon be
confined; leave him!"

alexey alexandrovitch flew into 
 
 ___________________________
 
ee, it’s better in
fact. he’ll be coming; it will hurt him to see her. give her to the
nurse."

"anna arkadyevna, he has come. here he is!" said the midwife, trying to
attract her attention to alexey alexandrovitch.

"oh, what nonsense!" anna went on, not seeing her husband. "no, give her
to me; give me my little one! he has not come yet. you say he won’t
forgive me, because you don’t know him. no one knows him. i’m the only
one, and it was hard for me even. his eyes i ought to know—seryozha has
just the same eyes—and i can’t bear to see them because of it. has
seryozha had his dinner? i know everyone will forget him. he would not
forget. seryozha must be moved into the corner room, and mariette must
be asked to sleep with him."

all of a sudden she shrank back, was silent; and in terror, as though
expecting a blow, as though to defend herself, she raised her hands to
her face. she had seen her husband.

"no, no!" she began. "i am not afraid of him; i am afraid of death.
alexey
 
 ___________________________
 
 woman. now i’m my real self, all myself. i’m
dying now, i know i shall die, ask him. even now i feel—see here, the
weights on my feet, on my hands, on my fingers. my fingers—see how huge
they are! but this will soon all be over.... only one thing i want:
forgive me, forgive me quite. i’m terrible, but my nurse used to tell
me; the holy martyr—what was her name? she was worse. and i’ll go to
rome; there’s a wilderness, and there i shall be no trouble to any one,
only i’ll take seryozha and the little one.... no, you can’t forgive me!
i know, it can’t be forgiven! no, no, go away, you’re too good!" she
held his hand in one burning hand, while she pushed him away with the
other.

the nervous agitation of alexey alexandrovitch kept increasing, and had
by now reached such a point that he ceased to struggle with it. he
suddenly felt that what he had regarded as nervous agitation was on the
contrary a blissful spiritual condition that gave him all at once a new
happiness he h
 
 ___________________________
 
irth at something; the same mirth that he had
perceived in the lawyer’s eyes, and just now in the eyes of this groom.
everyone seemed, somehow, hugely delighted, as though they had just been
at a wedding. when they met him, with ill-disguised enjoyment they
inquired after his wife’s health. the presence of princess tverskaya was
unpleasant to alexey alexandrovitch from the memories associated with
her, and also because he disliked her, and he went straight to the
nursery. in the day nursery seryozha, leaning on the table with his legs
on a chair, was drawing and chatting away merrily. the english
governess, who had during anna’s illness replaced the french one, was
sitting near the boy knitting a shawl. she hurriedly got up, curtseyed,
and pulled seryozha.

alexey alexandrovitch stroked his son’s hair, answered the governess’s
inquiries about his wife, and asked what the doctor had said of the
baby.

"the doctor said it was nothing serious, and he ordered a bath, sir."

"but she is s
 
 ___________________________
 
g
again.

"we’ll go to italy; you will get strong," he said.

"can it be possible we could be like husband and wife, alone, your
family with you?" she said, looking close into his eyes.

"it only seems strange to me that it can ever have been otherwise."

"stiva says that _he_ has agreed to everything, but i can’t accept _his_
generosity," she said, looking dreamily past vronsky’s face. "i don’t
want a divorce; it’s all the same to me now. only i don’t know what he
will decide about seryozha."

he could not conceive how at this moment of their meeting she could
remember and think of her son, of divorce. what did it all matter?

"don’t speak of that, don’t think of it," he said, turning her hand in
his, and trying to draw her attention to him; but still she did not look
at him.

"oh, why didn’t i die! it would have been better," she said, and silent
tears flowed down both her cheeks; but she tried to smile, so as not to
wound him.

to decline the flattering and dangerous appoi
 
 ___________________________
 
r a hat and ribbons, he could not recall without a rush of
self-pity.

"i understand, dear friend," said lidia ivanovna. "i understand it all.
succor and comfort you will find not in me, though i have come only to
aid you if i can. if i could take from off you all these petty,
humiliating cares ... i understand that a woman’s word, a woman’s
superintendence is needed. you will intrust it to me?"

silently and gratefully alexey alexandrovitch pressed her hand.

"together we will take care of seryozha. practical affairs are not my
strong point. but i will set to work. i will be your housekeeper. don’t
thank me. i do it not from myself..."

"i cannot help thanking you."

"but, dear friend, do not give way to the feeling of which you
spoke—being ashamed of what is the christian’s highest glory: _he who
humbles himself shall be exalted_. and you cannot thank me. you must
thank him, and pray to him for succor. in him alone we find peace,
consolation, salvation, and love," she said, and tur
 
 ___________________________
 
never argued, but by silence had assiduously parried her
attempts to provoke him into argument. now for the first time he heard
her words with pleasure, and did not inwardly oppose them.

"i am very, very grateful to you, both for your deeds and for your
words," he said, when she had finished praying.

countess lidia ivanovna once more pressed both her friend’s hands.

"now i will enter upon my duties," she said with a smile after a pause,
as she wiped away the traces of tears. "i am going to seryozha. only in
the last extremity shall i apply to you." and she got up and went out.

countess lidia ivanovna went into seryozha’s part of the house, and
dropping tears on the scared child’s cheeks, she told him that his
father was a saint and his mother was dead.

countess lidia ivanovna kept her promise. she did actually take upon
herself the care of the organization and management of alexey
alexandrovitch’s household. but she had not overstated the case when
saying that practical affairs we
 
 ___________________________
 
 feelings with which your heart is filled give me
    the, i feel, unpardonable boldness to write to you. i am
    miserable at being separated from my son. i entreat permission
    to see him once before my departure. forgive me for recalling
    myself to your memory. i apply to you and not to alexey
    alexandrovitch, simply because i do not wish to cause that
    generous man to suffer in remembering me. knowing your
    friendship for him, i know you will understand me. could you
    send seryozha to me, or should i come to the house at some fixed
    hour, or will you let me know when and where i could see him
    away from home? i do not anticipate a refusal, knowing the
    magnanimity of him with whom it rests. you cannot conceive the
    craving i have to see him, and so cannot conceive the gratitude
    your help will arouse in me.

                                                               anna"

everything in this letter exasperated countess lidia ivanovna: its
contents and t
 
 ___________________________
 
ssing through rows of ironical eyes, he was drawn as naturally to her
loving glance as a plant to the sun.

"i congratulate you," she said to him, her eyes on his ribbon.

suppressing a smile of pleasure, he shrugged his shoulders, closing his
eyes, as though to say that that could not be a source of joy to him.
countess lidia ivanovna was very well aware that it was one of his chief
sources of satisfaction, though he never admitted it.

"how is our angel?" said countess lidia ivanovna, meaning seryozha.

"i can’t say i was quite pleased with him," said alexey alexandrovitch,
raising his eyebrows and opening his eyes. "and sitnikov is not
satisfied with him." (sitnikov was the tutor to whom seryozha’s secular
education had been intrusted.) "as i have mentioned to you, there’s a
sort of coldness in him towards the most important questions which ought
to touch the heart of every man and every child...." alexey
alexandrovitch began expounding his views on the sole question that
interested h
 
 ___________________________
 
ity, and that there was peace and love in
his heart.

but the fact that he had in this transient, trivial life made, as it
seemed to him, a few trivial mistakes tortured him as though the eternal
salvation in which he believed had no existence. but this temptation did
not last long, and soon there was reestablished once more in alexey
alexandrovitch’s soul the peace and the elevation by virtue of which he
could forget what he did not want to remember.



chapter 26


"well, kapitonitch?" said seryozha, coming back rosy and good-humored
from his walk the day before his birthday, and giving his overcoat to
the tall old hall porter, who smiled down at the little person from the
height of his long figure. "well, has the bandaged clerk been here
today? did papa see him?"

"he saw him. the minute the chief secretary came out, i announced him,"
said the hall porter with a good-humored wink. "here, i’ll take it off."

"seryozha!" said the tutor, stopping in the doorway leading to the inner
rooms. 
 
 ___________________________
 
"take it off yourself." but seryozha, though he heard his tutor’s
feeble voice, did not pay attention to it. he stood keeping hold of the
hall porter’s belt, and gazing into his face.

"well, and did papa do what he wanted for him?"

the hall porter nodded his head affirmatively. the clerk with his face
tied up, who had already been seven times to ask some favor of alexey
alexandrovitch, interested both seryozha and the hall porter. seryozha
had come upon him in the hall, and had heard him plaintively beg the
hall porter to announce him, saying that he and his children had death
staring them in the face.

since then seryozha, having met him a second time in the hall, took
great interest in him.

"well, was he very glad?" he asked.

"glad? i should think so! almost dancing as he walked away."

"and has anything been left?" asked seryozha, after a pause.

"come, sir," said the hall-porter; then with a shake of his head he
whispered, 
 
 ___________________________
 
"something from the countess."

seryozha understood at once that what the hall porter was speaking of
was a present from countess lidia ivanovna for his birthday.

"what do you say? where?"

"korney took it to your papa. a fine plaything it must be too!"

"how big? like this?"

"rather small, but a fine thing."

"a book."

"no, a thing. run along, run along, vassily lukitch is calling you,"
said the porter, hearing the tutor’s steps approaching, and carefully
taking away from his belt the little hand in the glove half pulled off,
he
 
 ___________________________
 
 signed with his head towards the tutor.

"vassily lukitch, in a tiny minute!" answered seryozha with that gay and
loving smile which always won over the conscientious vassily lukitch.

seryozha was too happy, everything was too delightful for him to be able
to help sharing with his friend the porter the family good fortune of
which he had heard during his walk in the public gardens from lidia
ivanovna’s niece. this piece of good news seemed to him particularly
important from its coming at the same time with the gladness of the
bandaged clerk and his own gladness at toys having come for him. it
seemed to seryozha that this was a day on which everyone ought to be
glad and happy.

"you
 
 ___________________________
 
 know papa’s received the alexander nevsky today?"

"to be sure i do! people have been already to congratulate him."

"and is he glad?"

"glad at the tsar’s gracious favor! i should think so! it’s a proof he’s
deserved it," said the porter severely and seriously.

seryozha fell to dreaming, gazing up at the face of the porter, which he
had thoroughly studied in every detail, especially the chin that hung
down between the gray whiskers, never seen by anyone but seryozha, who
saw him only from below.

"well, and has your daughter been to see you lately?"

the porter’s daughter was a ballet dancer.

"when is she to come on week-days? they’ve their lessons to learn too.
and you’ve your lesson, sir; run along."

on coming into the room, seryozha, instead of sitting down to his
lessons, told his tutor of his supposition that what had been brought
him must be a machine. "what do you think?" he inquired.

but vassily lukitch was thinking of nothing but the nece
 
 ___________________________
 
son for the teacher, who was coming at two.

"no, do just tell me, vassily lukitch," he asked suddenly, when he was
seated at their work table with the book in his hands, "what is greater
than the alexander nevsky? you know papa’s received the alexander
nevsky?"

vassily lukitch replied that the vladimir was greater than the alexander
nevsky.

"and higher still?"

"well, highest of all is the andrey pervozvanny."

"and higher than the andrey?"

"i don’t know."

"what, you don’t know?" and seryozha, leaning on his elbows, sank into
deep meditation.

his meditations were of the most complex and diverse character. he
imagined his father’s having suddenly been presented with both the
vladimir and the andrey today, and in consequence being much better
tempered at his lesson, and dreamed how, when he was grown up, he would
himself receive all the orders, and what they might invent higher than
the andrey. directly any higher order were invented, he would win it.
they would make a higher one s
 
 ___________________________
 
till, and he would immediately win that
too.

the time passed in such meditations, and when the teacher came, the
lesson about the adverbs of place and time and manner of action was not
ready, and the teacher was not only displeased, but hurt. this touched
seryozha. he felt he was not to blame for not having learned the lesson;
however much he tried, he was utterly unable to do that. as long as the
teacher was explaining to him, he believed him and seemed to comprehend,
but as soon as he was left alone, he was positively unable to recollect
and to understand that the short and familiar word "suddenly" is an
adverb of manner of action. still he was sorry that he had disappointed
the teacher.

he chose a moment when the teacher was looking in silence at the
 
 ___________________________
 
 book.

"mihail ivanitch, when is your birthday?" he asked all, of a sudden.

"you’d much better be thinking about your work. birthdays are of no
importance to a rational being. it’s a day like any other on which one
has to do one’s work."

seryozha looked intently at the teacher, at his scanty beard, at his
spectacles, which had slipped down below the ridge on his nose, and fell
into so deep a reverie that he heard nothing of what the teacher was
explaining to him. he knew that the teacher did not think what he said;
he felt it from the tone in which it was said. "but why have they all
agreed to speak just in the same manner always the dreariest and most
useless stuff? why does he keep me off; why doesn’t he love me?" he
asked himself m
 
 ___________________________
 
ournfully, and could not think of an answer.



chapter 27


after the lesson with the grammar teacher came his father’s lesson.
while waiting for his father, seryozha sat at the table playing with a
penknife, and fell to dreaming. among seryozha’s favorite occupations
was searching for his mother during his walks. he did not believe in
death generally, and in her death in particular, in spite of what lidia
ivanovna had told him and his father had confirmed, and it was just
because of that, and after he had been told she was dead, that he had
begun looking for her when out for a walk. every woman of full, graceful
figure with dark hair was his mother. at the sight of such a woman such
a feeling of tenderness was stirred within him tha
 
 ___________________________
 
nd his father and lidia ivanovna had explained to him that she was dead
to him because she was wicked (which he could not possibly believe,
because he loved her), he went on seeking her and expecting her in the
same way. that day in the public gardens there had been a lady in a
lilac veil, whom he had watched with a throbbing heart, believing it to
be she as she came towards them along the path. the lady had not come up
to them, but had disappeared somewhere. that day, more intensely than
ever, seryozha felt a rush of love for her, and now, waiting for his
father, he forgot everything, and cut all round the edge of the table
with his penknife, staring straight before him with sparkling eyes and
dreaming of her.

"here is your papa!" said vassily lukitch, rousing him.

seryozha jumped up and went up to his father, and kissing his hand,
looked at him intently, trying to discover signs of his joy at receiving
the alexander nevsky.

"did you have a nice walk?" said alexey alexandrovitch, sitting d
 
 ___________________________
 
own in
his easy chair, pulling the volume of the old testament to him and
opening it. although alexey alexandrovitch had more than once told
seryozha that every christian ought to know scripture history
thoroughly, he often referred to the bible himself during the lesson,
and seryozha observed this.

"yes, it was very nice indeed, papa," said seryozha, sitting sideways on
his chair and rocking it, which was forbidden. "i saw nadinka" (nadinka
was a niece of lidia ivanovna’s who was being brought up in her house).
"she told me you’d been given a new star. are you glad, papa?"

"first of all, don’t rock your chair, please," said alexey
alexandrovitch. "and secondly, it’s not the reward that’s precious, but
the work itself. and i could have wished you understood that. if you now
are going to work, to study in order to win a reward, th
 
 ___________________________
 
en the work will
seem hard to you; but when you work" (alexey alexandrovitch, as he
spoke, thought of how he had been sustained by a sense of duty through
the wearisome labor of the morning, consisting of signing one hundred
and eighty papers), "loving your work, you will find your reward in it."

seryozha’s eyes, that had been shining with gaiety and tenderness, grew
dull and dropped before his father’s gaze. this was the same
long-familiar tone his father always took with him, and seryozha had
learned by now to fall in with it. his father always talked to him—so
seryozha felt—as though he were addressing some boy of his own
imagination, one of those boys that exist in books, utterly unlike
himself. and seryozha always tried with his father to act being the
story-book boy.

"you understand that, i hope?" said his father.

"yes, papa," answered seryozha, acting the part of the imaginary boy.

the lesson consisted of learning by heart several verses out of the
gospel and the rep
 
 ___________________________
 
etition of the beginning of the old testament. the
verses from the gospel seryozha knew fairly well, but at the moment when
he was saying them he became so absorbed in watching the sharply
protruding, bony knobbiness of his father’s forehead, that he lost the
thread, and he transposed the end of one verse and the beginning of
another. so it was evident to alexey alexandrovitch that he did not
understand what he was saying, and that irritated him.

he frowned, and began explaining what seryozha had heard many times
before and never could remember, because he understood it too well, just
as that "suddenly" is an adverb of manner of action. seryozha looked
with scared eyes at his father, and could think of nothing but whether
his father would make him repeat what he had said, as he sometimes did.
and this thought so alarmed seryozha that he now understood nothing. but
his father did not make him repeat it, and passed on to the lesson out
of the old testament. seryozha recounted the even
 
 ___________________________
 
who had been taken up alive to heaven. last
time he had remembered their names, but now he had forgotten them
utterly, chiefly because enoch was the personage he liked best in the
whole of the old testament, and enoch’s translation to heaven was
connected in his mind with a whole long train of thought, in which he
became absorbed now while he gazed with fascinated eyes at his father’s
watch-chain and a half-unbuttoned button on his waistcoat.

in death, of which they talked to him so often, seryozha disbelieved
entirely. he did not believe that those he loved could die, above all
that he himself would die. that was to him something utterly
inconceivable and impossible. but he had been told that all men die; he
had asked people, indeed, whom he trusted, and they too, had confirmed
it; his old nurse, too, said the same, though reluctantly. but enoch had
not died, and so it followed that everyone did not die. "and why cannot
anyone else so serve god and be taken alive to heaven?" thought
sery
 
 ___________________________
 
ozha. bad people, that is those seryozha did not like, they might
die, but the good might all be like enoch.

"well, what are the names of the patriarchs?"

"enoch, enos—"

"but you have said that already. this is bad, seryozha, very bad. if you
don’t try to learn what is more necessary than anything for a
christian," said his father, getting up, "whatever can interest you? i
am displeased with you, and piotr ignatitch" (this was the most
important of his teachers) "is displeased with you.... i shall have to
punish you."

his father and his teacher were both displeased with seryozha, and he
certainly did learn his lessons very badly. but still it could not be
said he was a stupid boy. on the contrary, he was far cle
 
 ___________________________
 
verer than the
boys his teacher held up as examples to seryozha. in his father’s
opinion, he did not want to learn what he was taught. in reality he
could not learn that. he could not, because the claims of his own soul
were more binding on him than those claims his father and his teacher
made upon him. those claims were in opposition, and he was in direct
conflict with his education. he was nine years old; he was a child; but
he knew his own soul, it was precious to him, he guarded it as the
eyelid guards the eye, and without the key of love he let no on
 
 ___________________________
 
e into
his soul. his teachers complained that he would not learn, while his
soul was brimming over with thirst for knowledge. and he learned from
kapitonitch, from his nurse, from nadinka, from vassily lukitch, but not
from his teachers. the spring his father and his teachers reckoned upon
to turn their mill-wheels had long dried up at the source, but its
waters did their work in another channel.

his father punished seryozha by not letting him go to see nadinka, lidia
ivanovna’s niece; but this punishment turned out happily for seryozha.
vassily lukitch was in a good humor, and showed him how to make
windmills. the whole evening passed over this work and in dreaming how
to make a windmill on which he could turn himself—clutching at the sails
or tying himself on and whirling round. of his mother seryozha did not
think all the evening, but when he had gone to bed, he suddenly
remembered her, and prayed in his own
 
 ___________________________
 
ed for tonight extra besides
the regular things?"

"that you might learn your lessons better?"

"no."

"toys?"

"no. you’ll never guess. a splendid thing; but it’s a secret! when it
comes to pass i’ll tell you. can’t you guess!"

"no, i can’t guess. you tell me," said vassily lukitch with a smile,
which was rare with him. "come, lie down, i’m putting out the candle."

"without the candle i can see better what i see and what i prayed for.
there! i was almost telling the secret!" said seryozha, laughing gaily.

when the candle was taken away, seryozha heard and felt his mother. she
stood over him, and with loving eyes caressed him. but then came
windmills, a knife, everything began to be mixed up, and he fell asleep.



chapter 28


on arriving in petersburg, vronsky and anna stayed at one of the best
hotels; vronsky apart in a lower story, anna above with her child, its
nurse, and her maid, in a large suite of four rooms.

on the day of his arrival vronsky went to his brother’s. t
 
 ___________________________
 
xey alexandrovitch, that
she felt she had no right to do. she might be refused admittance and
insulted. to write and so enter into relations with her husband—that it
made her miserable to think of doing; she could only be at peace when
she did not think of her husband. to get a glimpse of her son out
walking, finding out where and when he went out, was not enough for her;
she had so looked forward to this meeting, she had so much she must say
to him, she so longed to embrace him, to kiss him. seryozha’s old nurse
might be a help to her and show her what to do. but the nurse was not
now living in alexey alexandrovitch’s house. in this uncertainty, and in
efforts to find the nurse, two days had slipped by.

hearing of the close intimacy between alexey alexandrovitch and countess
lidia ivanovna, anna decided on the third day to write to her a letter,
which cost her great pains, and in which she intentionally said that
permission to see her son must depend on her husband’s generosity. she

 
 ___________________________
 
ed her,
but the letter, all that she read between the lines in it, so
exasperated her, this malice was so revolting beside her passionate,
legitimate tenderness for her son, that she turned against other people
and left off blaming herself.

"this coldness—this pretense of feeling!" she said to herself. "they
must needs insult me and torture the child, and i am to submit to it!
not on any consideration! she is worse than i am. i don’t lie, anyway."
and she decided on the spot that next day, seryozha’s birthday, she
would go straight to her husband’s house, bribe or deceive the servants,
but at any cost see her son and overturn the hideous deception with
which they were encompassing the unhappy child.

she went to a toy shop, bought toys and thought over a plan of action.
she would go early in the morning at eight o’clock, when alexey
alexandrovitch would be certain not to be up. she would have money in
her hand to give the hall porter and the footman, so that they should
let her in, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and not raising her veil, she would say that she had come
from seryozha’s godfather to congratulate him, and that she had been
charged to leave the toys at his bedside. she had prepared everything
but the words she should say to her son. often as she had dreamed of it,
she could never think of anything.

the next day, at eight o’clock in the morning, anna got out of a hired
sledge and rang at the front entrance of her former home.

"run and see what’s wanted. some lady," said kapitonitch, who, not yet
dressed, in his overcoat and galoshes, had peeped out of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he window and
seen a lady in a veil standing close up to the door. his assistant, a
lad anna did not know, had no sooner opened the door to her than she
came in, and pulling a three-rouble note out of her muff put it
hurriedly into his hand.

"seryozha—sergey alexeitch," she said, and was going on. scrutinizing
the note, the porter’s assistant stopped her at the second glass door.

"whom do you want?" he asked.

she did not hear his words and made no answer.

noticing the embarrassment of the unknown lady, kapitonitch went out to
her, opened the second door for her, and asked her what she was pleased
to want.

"from prince skorodumov for sergey alexeitch," she said.

"his honor’s not up yet," said the porter, looking at her attentively.
 
 ___________________________
 
dish yawn. from the sound of this yawn alone she knew
her son and seemed to see him living before her eyes.

"let me in; go away!" she said, and went in through the high doorway. on
the right of the door stood a bed, and sitting up in the bed was the
boy. his little body bent forward with his nightshirt unbuttoned, he was
stretching and still yawning. the instant his lips came together they
curved into a blissfully sleepy smile, and with that smile he slowly and
deliciously rolled back again.

"seryozha!" she whispered, going noiselessly up to him.

when she was parted from him, and all this latter time when she had been
feeling a fresh rush of love for him, she had pictured him as he was at
four years old, when she had loved him most of all. now he was not even
the same as when she had left him; he was still further from the
four-year-old baby, more grown and thinner. how thin his face was, how
short his hair was! what long hands! how he had changed since she left
him! but it was he with his 
 
 ___________________________
 
head, his lips, his soft neck and broad
little shoulders.

"seryozha!" she repeated just in the child’s ear.

he raised himself again on his elbow, turned his tangled head from side
to side as though looking for something, and opened his eyes. slowly and
inquiringly he looked for several seconds at his mother standing
motionless before him, then all at once he smiled a blissful smile, and
shutting his eyes, rolled not backwards but towards her into her arms.

"seryozha! my darling boy!" she said, breathing hard and putting her
arms round his plump little body. "mother!" he said, wriggling about in
her arms so as to touch her hands with different parts of him.

smiling sleepily still with closed eyes, he flung fat little arms round
her shoulders, rolled towards her, with the delicious sleepy warmth and
fragrance that is only found in children, and began rubbing his face
against her neck and shoulders.

"i know," he said, opening his eyes; "it’s my birthday t
 
 ___________________________
 
ars and turning away.
"come, it’s time for you to dress now," she added, after a pause, and,
never letting go his hands, she sat down by his bedside on the chair,
where his clothes were put ready for him.

"how do you dress without me? how..." she tried to begin talking simply
and cheerfully, but she could not, and again she turned away.

"i don’t have a cold bath, papa didn’t order it. and you’ve not seen
vassily lukitch? he’ll come in soon. why, you’re sitting on my clothes!"

and seryozha went off into a peal of laughter. she looked at him and
smiled.

"mother, darling, sweet one!" he shouted, flinging himself on her again
and hugging her. it was as though only now, on seeing her smile, he
fully grasped what had happened.

"i don’t want that on," he said, taking off her hat. and as it were,
seeing her afresh without her hat, he fell to kissing her again.

"but what did you think about me? you didn’t think i was dead?"

"i never believed it."

"you didn’t believe it, my swe
 
 ___________________________
 

hand that was stroking his hair, he pressed the open palm to his mouth
and kissed it.



chapter 30


meanwhile vassily lukitch had not at first understood who this lady was,
and had learned from their conversation that it was no other person than
the mother who had left her husband, and whom he had not seen, as he had
entered the house after her departure. he was in doubt whether to go in
or not, or whether to communicate with alexey alexandrovitch. reflecting
finally that his duty was to get seryozha up at the hour fixed, and that
it was therefore not his business to consider who was there, the mother
or anyone else, but simply to do his duty, he finished dressing, went to
the door and opened it.

but the embraces of the mother and child, the sound of their voices, and
what they were saying, made him change his mind.

he shook his head, and with a sigh he closed the door. "i’ll wait
another ten minutes," he said to himself, clearing his throat and wiping
away tears.

among the servants of
 
 ___________________________
 
aid korney contemptuously, and he turned to the nurse who
was coming in. "here, what do you think, marya efimovna: he let her in
without a word to anyone," korney said addressing her. "alexey
alexandrovitch will be down immediately—and go into the nursery!"

"a pretty business, a pretty business!" said the nurse. "you, korney
vassilievitch, you’d best keep him some way or other, the master, while
i’ll run and get her away somehow. a pretty business!"

when the nurse went into the nursery, seryozha was telling his mother
how he and nadinka had had a fall in sledging downhill, and had turned
over three times. she was listening to the sound of his voice, watching
his face and the play of expression on it, touching his hand, but she
did not follow what he was saying. she must go, she must leave him,—this
was the only thing she was thinking and feeling. she heard the steps of
vassily lukitch coming up to the door and coughing; she heard, too, the
steps of the nurse as she came near; but she
 
 ___________________________
 
ble of beginning to speak or to get up.

"mistress, darling!" began the nurse, going up to anna and kissing her
hands and shoulders. "god has brought joy indeed to our boy on his
birthday. you aren’t changed one bit."

"oh, nurse dear, i didn’t know you were in the house," said anna,
rousing herself for a moment.

"i’m not living here, i’m living with my daughter. i came for the
birthday, anna arkadyevna, darling!"

the nurse suddenly burst into tears, and began kissing her hand again.

seryozha, with radiant eyes and smiles, holding his mother by one hand
and his nurse by the other, pattered on the rug with his fat little bare
feet. the tenderness shown by his beloved nurse to his mother threw him
into an ecstasy.

"mother! she often comes to see me, and when she comes..." he was
beginning, but he stopped, noticing that the nurse was saying something
in a whisper to his mother, and that in his mother’s face there was a
look of dread and something like shame, which was so strangely
u
 
 ___________________________
 
nbecoming to her.

she went up to him.

"my sweet!" she said.

she could not say _good-bye_, but the expression on her face said it,
and he understood. "darling, darling kootik!" she used the name by which
she had called him when he was little, "you won’t forget me? you..." but
she could not say more.

how often afterwards she thought of words she might have said. but now
she did not know how to say it, and could say nothing. but seryozha knew
all she wanted to say to him. he understood that she was unhappy and
loved him. he understood even what the nurse had whispered. he had
caught the words "always at nine o’clock," and he knew that this was
said of his father, and that his father and mother could not meet. that
he understood, but one thing he could not understand—why there should be
a look of dread and shame in her face?... she was not in fault, but she
was afraid of him and ashamed of something. he would have liked to p
 
 ___________________________
 
ut a
question that would have set at rest this doubt, but he did not dare; he
saw that she was miserable, and he felt for her. silently he pressed
close to her and whispered, "don’t go yet. he won’t come just yet."

the mother held him away from her to see what he was thinking, what to
say to him, and in his frightened face she read not only that he was
speaking of his father, but, as it were, asking her what he ought to
think about his father.

"seryozha, my darling," she said, "love him; he’s better and kinder than
i am, and i have done him wrong. when you grow up you will judge."

"there’s no one better than you!..." he cried in despair through his
tears, and, clutching her by the shoulders, he began squeezing her with
all his force to him, his arms trembling with the strain.

"my sweet, my little one!" said anna, and she cried as weakly and
childishly as he.

at that moment the door opened. vassily lukitch came in.

at the other door the
 
 ___________________________
 
re was the sound of steps, and the nurse in a
scared whisper said, "he’s coming," and gave anna her hat.

seryozha sank onto the bed and sobbed, hiding his face in his hands.
anna removed his hands, once more kissed his wet face, and with rapid
steps went to the door. alexey alexandrovitch walked in, meeting her.
seeing her, he stopped short and bowed his head.

although she had just said he was better and kinder than she, in the
rapid glance she flung at him, taking in his whole figure in all its
details, feelings of repulsion and hatred for him and jealousy over her
son took possession of her. with a swif
 
 ___________________________
 
le not to smile, not to kiss
the baby, impossible not to hold out a finger for her to clutch, crowing
and prancing all over; impossible not to offer her a lip which she
sucked into her little mouth by way of a kiss. and all this anna did,
and took her in her arms and made her dance, and kissed her fresh little
cheek and bare little elbows; but at the sight of this child it was
plainer than ever to her that the feeling she had for her could not be
called love in comparison with what she felt for seryozha. everything in
this baby was charming, but for some reason all this did not go deep to
her heart. on her first child, though the child of an unloved father,
had been concentrated all the love that had never found satisfaction.
her baby girl had been born in the most painful circumstances and had
not had a hundredth part of the care and thought which had been
concentrated on her first child. besides, in the little girl everything
was still in the future, while seryozha was by now almost a person
 
 ___________________________
 
ality,
and a personality dearly loved. in him there was a conflict of thought
and feeling; he understood her, he loved her, he judged her, she
thought, recalling his words and his eyes. and she was forever—not
physically only but spiritually—divided from him, and it was impossible
to set this right.

she gave the baby back to the nurse, let her go, and opened the locket
in which there was seryozha’s portrait when he was almost of the same
age as the girl. she got up, and, taking off her hat, took up from a
little table an album in which there were photographs of her son at
different ages. she wanted to compare them, and began taking them out of
the album. she took them all out except one, the latest and best
photograph. in it he was in a white smock, sitting astride a chair, with
frowning eyes and smiling lips. it was his best, most characteristic
expression. with her little supple han
 
 ___________________________
 
thing, and could not find it.

most amazing of all was the fact that on being asked how many teeth the
baby had, anna answered wrong, and knew nothing about the two last
teeth.

"i sometimes feel sorry i’m so superfluous here," said anna, going out
of the nursery and holding up her skirt so as to escape the plaything
standing in the doorway. "it was very different with my first child."

"i expected it to be the other way," said darya alexandrovna shyly.

"oh, no! by the way, do you know i saw seryozha?" said anna, screwing up
her eyes, as though looking at something far away. "but we’ll talk about
that later. you wouldn’t believe it, i’m like a hungry beggar woman when
a full dinner is set before her, and she does not know what to begin on
first. the dinner is you, and the talks i have before me with you, which
i could never have with anyone else; and i don’t know which subject to
begin upon first. _mais je ne vous ferai grace de rien_. i must have
everything out with you."

"oh, i o
 
 ___________________________
 
m.... well, suppose i make the effort; i do it. either i
receive a humiliating refusal or consent.... well, i have received his
consent, say..." anna was at that moment at the furthest end of the
room, and she stopped there, doing something to the curtain at the
window. "i receive his consent, but my ... my son? they won’t give him
up to me. he will grow up despising me, with his father, whom i’ve
abandoned. do you see, i love ... equally, i think, but both more than
myself—two creatures, seryozha and alexey."

she came out into the middle of the room and stood facing dolly, with
her arms pressed tightly across her chest. in her white dressing gown
her figure seemed more than usually grand and broad. she bent her head,
and with shining, wet eyes looked from under her brows at dolly, a thin
little pitiful figure in her patched dressing jacket and nightcap,
shaking all over with emotion.

"it is only those two creatures that i love, and one excludes the other.
i can’t have them together,
 
 ___________________________
 
; "but
like a messenger i have simply performed the commission given me."

alexey alexandrovitch gave him his hand, pondered a little, and said:

"i must think it over and seek for guidance. the day after tomorrow i
will give you a final answer," he said, after considering a moment.



chapter 19


stepan arkadyevitch was about to go away when korney came in to
announce:

"sergey alexyevitch!"

"who’s sergey alexyevitch?" stepan arkadyevitch was beginning, but he
remembered immediately.

"ah, seryozha!" he said aloud. "sergey alexyevitch! i thought it was the
director of a department. anna asked me to see him too," he thought.

and he recalled the timid, piteous expression with which anna had said
to him at parting: "anyway, you will see him. find out exactly where he
is, who is looking after him. and stiva ... if it were possible! could
it be possible?" stepan arkadyevitch knew what was meant by that "if it
were possible,"—if it were possible to arrange the divorce so as to let
her have h
 
 ___________________________
 
 mention a single word
about her.

"he was very ill after that interview with his mother, which we had not
foreseen," said alexey alexandrovitch. "indeed, we feared for his life.
but with rational treatment, and sea-bathing in the summer, he regained
his strength, and now, by the doctor’s advice, i have let him go to
school. and certainly the companionship of school has had a good effect
on him, and he is perfectly well, and making good progress."

"what a fine fellow he’s grown! he’s not seryozha now, but quite
full-fledged sergey alexyevitch!" said stepan arkadyevitch, smiling, as
he looked at the handsome, broad-shouldered lad in blue coat and long
trousers, who walked in alertly and confidently. the boy looked healthy
and good-humored. he bowed to his uncle as to a stranger, but
recognizing him, he blushed and turned hurriedly away from him, as
though offended and irritated at something. the boy went up to his
father and handed him a note of the marks he had gained in school.

"well,
 
 ___________________________
 
 at his uncle.

"yes, _mon oncle_," he answered, glancing at his father, and again he
looked downcast.

his uncle called him to him, and took his hand.

"well, and how are you getting on?" he said, wanting to talk to him, and
not knowing what to say.

the boy, blushing and making no answer, cautiously drew his hand away.
as soon as stepan arkadyevitch let go his hand, he glanced doubtfully at
his father, and like a bird set free, he darted out of the room.

a year had passed since the last time seryozha had seen his mother.
since then he had heard nothing more of her. and in the course of that
year he had gone to school, and made friends among his schoolfellows.
the dreams and memories of his mother, which had made him ill after
seeing her, did not occupy his thoughts now. when they came back to him,
he studiously drove them away, regarding them as shameful and girlish,
below the dignity of a boy and a schoolboy. he knew that his father and
mother were separated by some quarrel, he knew that h
 
 ___________________________
 
 that idea.

he disliked seeing his uncle, so like his mother, for it called up those
memories of which he was ashamed. he disliked it all the more as from
some words he had caught as he waited at the study door, and still more
from the faces of his father and uncle, he guessed that they must have
been talking of his mother. and to avoid condemning the father with whom
he lived and on whom he was dependent, and, above all, to avoid giving
way to sentimentality, which he considered so degrading, seryozha tried
not to look at his uncle who had come to disturb his peace of mind, and
not to think of what he recalled to him.

but when stepan arkadyevitch, going out after him, saw him on the
stairs, and calling to him, asked him how he spent his playtime at
school, seryozha talked more freely to him away from his father’s
presence.

"we have a railway now," he said in answer to his uncle’s question.
"it’s like this, do you see: two sit on a bench—they’re the passengers;
and one stands up s
 
 ___________________________
 
 arkadyevitch inquired, smiling.

"yes, you want pluck for it, and cleverness too, especially when they
stop all of a sudden, or someone falls down."

"yes, that must be a serious matter," said stepan arkadyevitch, watching
with mournful interest the eager eyes, like his mother’s; not childish
now—no longer fully innocent. and though he had promised alexey
alexandrovitch not to speak of anna, he could not restrain himself.

"do you remember your mother?" he asked suddenly.

"no, i don’t," seryozha said quickly. he blushed crimson, and his face
clouded over. and his uncle could get nothing more out of him. his tutor
found his pupil on the staircase half an hour later, and for a long
while he could not make out whether he was ill-tempered or crying.

"what is it? i expect you hurt yourself when you fell down?" said the
tutor. "i told you it was a dangerous game. and we shall have to speak
to the director."

"if i had hurt myself, nobody should have found it out, that’s certain."

"well, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and to justify him.

"i am myself to blame. i’m irritable, i’m insanely jealous. i will make
it up with him, and we’ll go away to the country; there i shall be more
at peace."

"unnatural!" she suddenly recalled the word that had stung her most of
all, not so much the word itself as the intent to wound her with which
it was said. "i know what he meant; he meant—unnatural, not loving my
own daughter, to love another person’s child. what does he know of love
for children, of my love for seryozha, whom i’ve sacrificed for him? but
that wish to wound me! no, he loves another woman, it must be so."

and perceiving that, while trying to regain her peace of mind, she had
gone round the same circle that she had been round so often before, and
had come back to her former state of exasperation, she was horrified at
herself. "can it be impossible? can it be beyond me to control myself?"
she said to herself, and began again from the beginning. "he’s truthful,
he’s honest, he loves me. i lo
 
 ___________________________
 
t was some obscure idea
that alone interested her, but she could not get clear sight of it.
thinking once more of alexey alexandrovitch, she recalled the time of
her illness after her confinement, and the feeling which never left her
at that time. "why didn’t i die?" and the words and the feeling of that
time came back to her. and all at once she knew what was in her soul.
yes, it was that idea which alone solved all. "yes, to die!... and the
shame and disgrace of alexey alexandrovitch and of seryozha, and my
awful shame, it will all be saved by death. to die! and he will feel
remorse; will be sorry; will love me; he will suffer on my account."
with the trace of a smile of commiseration for herself she sat down in
the armchair, taking off and putting on the rings on her left hand,
vividly picturing from different sides his feelings after her death.

approaching footsteps—his steps—distracted her attention. as though
absorbed in the arrangement of her rings, she did not even turn to him.

 
 ___________________________
 
l with
the note to the stables. make haste."

she sat down and wrote:

"i was wrong. come back home; i must explain. for god’s sake come! i’m
afraid."

she sealed it up and gave it to the servant.

she was afraid of being left alone now; she followed the servant out of
the room, and went to the nursery.

"why, this isn’t it, this isn’t he! where are his blue eyes, his sweet,
shy smile?" was her first thought when she saw her chubby, rosy little
girl with her black, curly hair instead of seryozha, whom in the tangle
of her ideas she had expected to see in the nursery. the little girl
sitting at the table was obstinately and violently battering on it with
a cork, and staring aimlessly at her mother with her pitch-black eyes.
answering the english nurse that she was quite well, and that she was
going to the country tomorrow, anna sat down by the little girl and
began spinning the cork to show her. but the child’s loud, ringing
laugh, and the motion of her eyebrows, recalled vronsky so v
 
 ___________________________
 
 she thought
of her past with alexey alexandrovitch, of how she had blotted the
memory of it out of her life. "dolly will think i’m leaving my second
husband, and so i certainly must be in the wrong. as if i cared to be
right! i can’t help it!" she said, and she wanted to cry. but at once
she fell to wondering what those two girls could be smiling about.
"love, most likely. they don’t know how dreary it is, how low.... the
boulevard and the children. three boys running, playing at horses.
seryozha! and i’m losing everything and not getting him back. yes, i’m
losing everything, if he doesn’t return. perhaps he was late for the
train and has come back by now. longing for humiliation again!" she said
to herself. "no, i’ll go to dolly, and say straight out to her, i’m
unhappy, i deserve this, i’m to blame, but still i’m unhappy, help me.
these horses, this carriage—how loathsome i am to myself in this
carriage—all his; but i won’t see them again."

thinking over the words
 
 ___________________________
 
t what i
want, that’s a thousand times worse than unkindness! that’s—hell! and
that’s just how it is. for a long while now he hasn’t loved me. and
where love ends, hate begins. i don’t know these streets at all. hills
it seems, and still houses, and houses .... and in the houses always
people and people.... how many of them, no end, and all hating each
other! come, let me try and think what i want, to make me happy. well?
suppose i am divorced, and alexey alexandrovitch lets me have seryozha,
and i marry vronsky." thinking of alexey alexandrovitch, she at once
pictured him with extraordinary vividness as though he were alive before
her, with his mild, lifeless, dull eyes, the blue veins in his white
hands, his intonations and the cracking of his fingers, and remembering
the feeling which had existed between them, and which was also called
love, she shuddered with loathing. "well, i’m divorced, and become
vronsky’s wife. well, will kitty cease looking at me as she looked at me
t
 
 ___________________________
 
oday? no. and will seryozha leave off asking and wondering about my two
husbands? and is there any new feeling i can awaken between vronsky and
me? is there possible, if not happiness, some sort of ease from misery?
no, no!" she answered now without the slightest hesitation. "impossible!
we are drawn apart by life, and i make his unhappiness, and he mine, and
there’s no altering him or me. every attempt has been made, the screw
has come unscrewed. oh, a beggar woman with a baby. she thinks i’m sorry
for her. aren’t 
 
 ___________________________
 
we all flung into the world only to hate each other, and
so to torture ourselves and each other? schoolboys coming—laughing
seryozha?" she thought. "i thought, too, that i loved him, and used to
be touched by my own tenderness. but i have lived without him, i gave
him up for another love, and did not regret the exchange till that love
was satisfied." and with loathing she thought of what she meant by that
love. and the clearness with which she saw life now, her own and all
men’s, was a pleasure to her. "it’s so with me and pyotr, and the
coachman, fyodor, and that merchant, and all the people living along the
volga, wher