essly gloomed at the upper regions. “you leave him--?”

“so long with quint? yes--i don’t mind that now.”

she always ended, at these moments, by getting possession of my hand,
and in this manner she could at present still stay me. but after gasping
an instant at my sudden resignation, “because of your letter?” she
eagerly brought out.

i quickly, by way of answer, felt for my letter, drew it forth, held it
up, and then, freeing myself, went and laid it on the great hall table.
“luke will take it,” i said as i came back. i reached the house door and
opened it; i was already on the steps.

my companion still demurred: the storm of the night and the early
morning had dropped, but the afternoon was damp and gray. i came down to
the drive while she stood in the doorway. “you go with nothing on?”

“what do i care when the child has nothing? i can’t wait to dress,” i
cried, “and if you must do so, i leave you. try meanwhile, yourself,
upstairs.”

“with them?” 
 
 ___________________________
 
fore you.”

i now perceived still more how she had been beating about the bush and
how weary at last it had made her. “your letter won’t have got there.
your letter never went.”

“what then became of it?”

“goodness knows! master miles--”

“do you mean he took it?” i gasped.

she hung fire, but she overcame her reluctance. “i mean that i saw
yesterday, when i came back with miss flora, that it wasn’t where you
had put it. later in the evening i had the chance to question luke, and
he declared that he had neither noticed nor touched it.” we could only
exchange, on this, one of our deeper mutual soundings, and it was mrs.
grose who first brought up the plumb with an almost elated “you see!”

“yes, i see that if miles took it instead he probably will have read it
and destroyed it.”

“and don’t you see anything else?”

i faced her a moment with a sad smile. “it strikes me that by this time
your eyes are open even wider than mine.”

they proved to be 
 
 ___________________________
 
i’ll
tell you everything,” miles said--“i mean i’ll tell you anything you
like. you’ll stay on with me, and we shall both be all right, and i will
tell you--i will. but not now.”

“why not now?”

my insistence turned him from me and kept him once more at his window
in a silence during which, between us, you might have heard a pin drop.
then he was before me again with the air of a person for whom, outside,
someone who had frankly to be reckoned with was waiting. “i have to see
luke.”

i had not yet reduced him to quite so vulgar a lie, and i felt
proportionately ashamed. but, horrible as it was, his lies made up my
truth. i achieved thoughtfully a few loops of my knitting. “well, then,
go to luke, and i’ll wait for what you promise. only, in return for
that, satisfy, before you leave me, one very much smaller request.”

he looked as if he felt he had succeeded enough to be able still a
little to bargain. “very much smaller--?”

“yes, a mere fraction of the w