d as i can give.'

'then, if you hear of me being discovered dead in a bog or a pit full of
snow, your conscience won't whisper that it is partly your fault?'

'how so?  i cannot escort you.  they wouldn't let me go to the end of the
garden wall.'

'_you_!  i should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold, for my
convenience, on such a night,' i cried.  'i want you to tell me my way,
not to _show_ it: or else to persuade mr. heathcliff to give me a guide.'

'who?  there is himself, earnshaw, zillah, joseph and i.  which would you
have?'

'are there no boys at the farm?'

'no; those are all.'

'then, it follows that i am compelled to stay.'

'that you may settle with your host.  i have nothing to do with it.'

'i hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more rash journeys on these
hills,' cried heathcliff's stern voice from the kitchen entrance.  'as to
staying here, i don't keep accommodations for visitors: you must share a
bed with hareton or joseph, if you do.'

'i can sleep on a chai
 
 ___________________________
 
 i ordered the miscreants to let me out--on their peril to keep me
one minute longer--with several incoherent threats of retaliation that,
in their indefinite depth of virulency, smacked of king lear.

the vehemence of my agitation brought on a copious bleeding at the nose,
and still heathcliff laughed, and still i scolded.  i don't know what
would have concluded the scene, had there not been one person at hand
rather more rational than myself, and more benevolent than my
entertainer.  this was zillah, the stout housewife; who at length issued
forth to inquire into the nature of the uproar.  she thought that some of
them had been laying violent hands on me; and, not daring to attack her
master, she turned her vocal artillery against the younger scoundrel.

'well, mr. earnshaw,' she cried, 'i wonder what you'll have agait next?
are we going to murder folk on our very door-stones?  i see this house
will never do for me--look at t' poor lad, he's fair choking!  wisht,
wisht; you mun'n't go on s
 
 ___________________________
 
o.  come in, and i'll cure that: there now,
hold ye still.'

with these words she suddenly splashed a pint of icy water down my neck,
and pulled me into the kitchen.  mr. heathcliff followed, his accidental
merriment expiring quickly in his habitual moroseness.

i was sick exceedingly, and dizzy, and faint; and thus compelled perforce
to accept lodgings under his roof.  he told zillah to give me a glass of
brandy, and then passed on to the inner room; while she condoled with me
on my sorry predicament, and having obeyed his orders, whereby i was
somewhat revived, ushered me to bed.




chapter iii


while leading the way upstairs, she recommended that i should hide the
candle, and not make a noise; for her master had an odd notion about the
chamber she would put me in, and never let anybody lodge there willingly.
i asked the reason.  she did not know, she answered: she had o
 
 ___________________________
 
ne to
scream in my sleep, owing to a frightful nightmare.  i'm sorry i
disturbed you.'

'oh, god confound you, mr. lockwood!  i wish you were at the--' commenced
my host, setting the candle on a chair, because he found it impossible to
hold it steady.  'and who showed you up into this room?' he continued,
crushing his nails into his palms, and grinding his teeth to subdue the
maxillary convulsions.  'who was it?  i've a good mind to turn them out
of the house this moment?'

'it was your servant zillah,' i replied, flinging myself on to the floor,
and rapidly resuming my garments.  'i should not care if you did, mr.
heathcliff; she richly deserves it.  i suppose that she wanted to get
another proof that the place was haunted, at my expense.  well, it
is--swarming with ghosts and goblins!  you have reason in shutting it up,
i assure you.  no one will thank you for a doze in such a den!'

'what do you mean?' asked heathcliff, 'and what are you doing?  lie down
and finish out the night, since yo
 
 ___________________________
 
nced over
the back of the bench, dilating his nostrils, and thought as little of
exchanging civilities with me as with my companion the cat.  i guessed,
by his preparations, that egress was allowed, and, leaving my hard couch,
made a movement to follow him.  he noticed this, and thrust at an inner
door with the end of his spade, intimating by an inarticulate sound that
there was the place where i must go, if i changed my locality.

it opened into the house, where the females were already astir; zillah
urging flakes of flame up the chimney with a colossal bellows; and mrs.
heathcliff, kneeling on the hearth, reading a book by the aid of the
blaze.  she held her hand interposed between the furnace-heat and her
eyes, and seemed absorbed in her occupation; desisting from it only to
chide the servant for covering her with sparks, or to push away a dog,
now and then, that snoozled its nose overforwardly into her face.  i was
surprised to see heathcliff there also.  he stood by the fire, his back
t
 
 ___________________________
 
owards me, just finishing a stormy scene with poor zillah; who ever and
anon interrupted her labour to pluck up the corner of her apron, and
heave an indignant groan.

'and you, you worthless--' he broke out as i entered, turning to his
daughter-in-law, and employing an epithet as harmless as duck, or sheep,
but generally represented by a dash--.  'there you are, at your idle
tricks again!  the rest of them do earn their bread--you live on my
charity!  put your trash away, and find something to do.  you shall pay
me for the plague of having you eterna
 
 ___________________________
 
nvalid
complained of being covered with ashes; but he had a tiresome cough, and
looked feverish and ill, so i did not rebuke his temper.

'well, linton,' murmured catherine, when his corrugated brow relaxed,
'are you glad to see me?  can i do you any good?'

'why didn't you come before?' he asked.  'you should have come, instead
of writing.  it tired me dreadfully writing those long letters.  i'd far
rather have talked to you.  now, i can neither bear to talk, nor anything
else.  i wonder where zillah is!  will you' (looking at me) 'step into
the kitchen and see?'

i had received no thanks for my other service; and being unwilling to run
to and fro at his behest, i replied--'nobody is out there but joseph.'

'i want to drink,' he exclaimed fretfully, turning away.  'zillah is
constantly gadding off to gimmerton since papa went: it's miserable!  and
i'm obliged to come down here--they resolved never to hear me up-stairs.'

'is your father attentive to you, master heathcliff?' i asked, perceiv
 
 ___________________________
 
on, i got possession of the key, and told
him how my cousin wished me to visit him, because he was sick, and
couldn't come to the grange; and how papa would object to my going: and
then i negotiated with him about the pony.  he is fond of reading, and he
thinks of leaving soon to get married; so he offered, if i would lend him
books out of the library, to do what i wished: but i preferred giving him
my own, and that satisfied him better.

'on my second visit linton seemed in lively spirits; and zillah (that is
their housekeeper) made us a clean room and a good fire, and told us
that, as joseph was out at a prayer-meeting and hareton earnshaw was off
with his dogs--robbing our woods of pheasants, as i heard afterwards--we
might do what we liked.  she brought me some warm wine and gingerbread,
and appeared exceedingly good-natured, and linton sat in the arm-chair,
and i in the little rocking chair on the hearth-stone, and we laughed and
talked so merrily, and found so much to say: we planned w
 
 ___________________________
 
ilee.  i said his heaven would be only half alive;
and he said mine would be drunk: i said i should fall asleep in his; and
he said he could not breathe in mine, and began to grow very snappish.  at
last, we agreed to try both, as soon as the right weather came; and then
we kissed each other and were friends.

'after sitting still an hour, i looked at the great room with its smooth
uncarpeted floor, and thought how nice it would be to play in, if we
removed the table; and i asked linton to call zillah in to help us, and
we'd have a game at blindman's-buff; she should try to catch us: you used
to, you know, ellen.  he wouldn't: there was no pleasure in it, he said;
but he consented to play at ball with me.  we found two in a cupboard,
among a heap of old toys, tops, and hoops, and battledores and
shuttlecocks.  one was marked c., and the other h.; i wished to have the
c., because that stood for catherine, and the h. might be for heathcliff,
his name; but the bran came out of h., and linton di
 
 ___________________________
 


joseph uttered his croaking laugh again.

'"thear, that's t' father!" he cried.  "that's father!  we've allas
summut o' either side in us.  niver heed, hareton, lad--dunnut be
'feard--he cannot get at thee!"

'i took hold of linton's hands, and tried to pull him away; but he
shrieked so shockingly that i dared not proceed.  at last his cries were
choked by a dreadful fit of coughing; blood gushed from his mouth, and he
fell on the ground.  i ran into the yard, sick with terror; and called
for zillah, as loud as i could.  she soon heard me: she was milking the
cows in a shed behind the barn, and hurrying from her work, she inquired
what there was to do?  i hadn't breath to explain; dragging her in, i
looked about for linton.  earnshaw had come out to examine the mischief
he had caused, and he was then conveying the poor thing up-stairs.  zillah
and i ascended after him; but he stopped me at the top of the steps, and
said i shouldn't go in: i must go home.  i exclaimed that he had killed
lin
 
 ___________________________
 
ening, and i didn't go to wuthering
heights the next: i wished to go exceedingly; but i was strangely
excited, and dreaded to hear that linton was dead, sometimes; and
sometimes shuddered at the thought of encountering hareton.  on the third
day i took courage: at least, i couldn't bear longer suspense, and stole
off once more.  i went at five o'clock, and walked; fancying i might
manage to creep into the house, and up to linton's room, unobserved.
however, the dogs gave notice of my approach.  zillah received me, and
saying "the lad was mending nicely," showed me into a small, tidy,
carpeted apartment, where, to my inexpressible joy, i beheld linton laid
on a little sofa, reading one of my books.  but he would neither speak to
me nor look at me, through a whole hour, ellen: he has such an unhappy
temper.  and what quite confounded me, when he did open his mouth, it was
to utter the falsehood that i had occasioned the uproar, and hareton was
not to blame!  unable to reply, except passionatel
 
 ___________________________
 
s so miserable going to bed and getting up, and never
hearing anything about him, that my resolution melted into air before it
was properly formed.  it had appeared wrong to take the journey once; now
it seemed wrong to refrain.  michael came to ask if he must saddle minny;
i said "yes," and considered myself doing a duty as she bore me over the
hills.  i was forced to pass the front windows to get to the court: it
was no use trying to conceal my presence.

'"young master is in the house," said zillah, as she saw me making for
the parlour.  i went in; earnshaw was there also, but he quitted the room
directly.  linton sat in the great arm-chair half asleep; walking up to
the fire, i began in a serious tone, partly meaning it to be true--

'"as you don't like me, linton, and as you think i come on purpose to
hurt you, and pretend that i do so every time, this is our last meeting:
let us say good-bye; and tell mr. heathcliff that you have no wish to see
me, and that he mustn't invent any more f
 
 ___________________________
 
otcy.  we reached the threshold;
catherine walked in, and i stood waiting till she had conducted the
invalid to a chair, expecting her out immediately; when mr. heathcliff,
pushing me forward, exclaimed--'my house is not stricken with the plague,
nelly; and i have a mind to be hospitable to-day: sit down, and allow me
to shut the door.'

he shut and locked it also.  i started.

'you shall have tea before you go home,' he added.  'i am by myself.
hareton is gone with some cattle to the lees, and zillah and joseph are
off on a journey of pleasure; and, though i'm used to being alone, i'd
rather have some interesting company, if i can get it.  miss linton, take
your seat by _him_.  i give you what i have: the present is hardly worth
accepting; but i have nothing else to offer.  it is linton, i mean.  how
she does stare!  it's odd what a savage feeling i have to anything that
seems afraid of me!  had i been born where laws are less strict and
tastes less dainty, i should treat myself to a slow v
 
 ___________________________
 
me, and tried entreaty in her turn,
persuading him to subdue his selfish agony.  while they were thus
occupied, our jailor re-entered.

'your beasts have trotted off,' he said, 'and--now linton! snivelling
again?  what has she been doing to you?  come, come--have done, and get
to bed.  in a month or two, my lad, you'll be able to pay her back her
present tyrannies with a vigorous hand.  you're pining for pure love, are
you not? nothing else in the world: and she shall have you!  there, to
bed!  zillah won't be here to-night; you must undress yourself.  hush!
hold your noise!  once in your own room, i'll not come near you: you
needn't fear.  by chance, you've managed tolerably.  i'll look to the
rest.'

he spoke these words, holding the door open for his son to pass, and the
latter achieved his exit exactly as a spaniel might which suspected the
person who attended on it of designing a spiteful squeeze.  the lock was
re-secured.  heathcliff approached the fire, where my mistress and i
stood s
 
 ___________________________
 
rine.  'i
wish he would arrive!  who knows but he might take our part?'

'it was three servants sent to seek you from the grange,' said
heathcliff, overhearing me.  'you should have opened a lattice and called
out: but i could swear that chit is glad you didn't.  she's glad to be
obliged to stay, i'm certain.'

at learning the chance we had missed, we both gave vent to our grief
without control; and he allowed us to wail on till nine o'clock.  then he
bid us go upstairs, through the kitchen, to zillah's chamber; and i
whispered my companion to obey: perhaps we might contrive to get through
the window there, or into a garret, and out by its skylight.  the window,
however, was narrow, like those below, and the garret trap was safe from
our attempts; for we were fastened in as before.  we neither of us lay
down: catherine took her station by the lattice, and watched anxiously
for morning; a deep sigh being the only answer i could obtain to my
frequent entreaties that she would try to rest.  i s
 
 ___________________________
 
tain him.

and there i remained enclosed the whole day, and the whole of the next
night; and another, and another.  five nights and four days i remained,
altogether, seeing nobody but hareton once every morning; and he was a
model of a jailor: surly, and dumb, and deaf to every attempt at moving
his sense of justice or compassion.




chapter xxviii


on the fifth morning, or rather afternoon, a different step
approached--lighter and shorter; and, this time, the person entered the
room.  it was zillah; donned in her scarlet shawl, with a black silk
bonnet on her head, and a willow-basket swung to her arm.

'eh, dear!  mrs. dean!' she exclaimed.  'well! there is a talk about you
at gimmerton.  i never thought but you were sunk in the blackhorse marsh,
and missy with you, till master told me you'd been found, and he'd lodged
you here!  what! and you must have got on an island, sure?  and how long
were you in the hole?  did master save you, mrs. dean?  but you're not so
thin--you've not been so
 
 ___________________________
 
 poorly, have you?'

'your master is a true scoundrel!' i replied.  'but he shall answer for
it.  he needn't have raised that tale: it shall all be laid bare!'

'what do you mean?' asked zillah.  'it's not his tale: they tell that in
the village--about your being lost in the marsh; and i calls to earnshaw,
when i come in--"eh, they's queer things, mr. hareton, happened since i
went off.  it's a sad pity of that likely young lass, and cant nelly
dean."  he stared.  i thought he had not heard aught, so i told him the
rumour.  the master listened, and he just smiled to himself, and said,
"if they have been in the marsh, they are out now, zillah.  nelly dean is
lodged, at this minute, in 
 
 ___________________________
 
your room.  you can tell her to flit, when you
go up; here is the key.  the bog-water got into her head, and she would
have run home quite flighty; but i fixed her till she came round to her
senses.  you can bid her go to the grange at once, if she be able, and
carry a message from me, that her young lady will follow in time to
attend the squire's funeral."'

'mr. edgar is not dead?' i gasped.  'oh! zillah, zillah!'

'no, no; sit you down, my good mistress,' she replied; 'you're right
sickly yet.  he's not dead; doctor kenneth thinks he may last another
day.  i met him on the road and asked.'

instead of sitting down, i snatched my outdoor things, and hastened
below, for the way was free.  on entering the house, i looked about for
some one to give information of catherine.  the place was filled with
sunshine, and the door stood wide open; but nobody seemed at hand.  as i
hesitated whether to go off at on
 
 ___________________________
 
th her face to the wall, and she has
never spoken to me since: and i sometimes think she can't speak for pain.
i don't like to think so; but she's a naughty thing for crying
continually; and she looks so pale and wild, i'm afraid of her.'

'and you can get the key if you choose?' i said.

'yes, when i am up-stairs,' he answered; 'but i can't walk up-stairs
now.'

'in what apartment is it?' i asked.

'oh,' he cried, 'i shan't tell _you_ where it is.  it is our secret.
nobody, neither hareton nor zillah, is to know.  there! you've tired
me--go away, go away!'  and he turned his face on to his arm, and shut
his eyes again.

i considered it best to depart without seeing mr. heathcliff, and bring a
rescue for my young lady from the grange.  on reaching it, the
astonishment of my fellow-servants to see me, and their joy also, was
intense; and when they heard that their little mistress was safe, two or
three were about to hurry up and shout the news at mr. edgar's door: but
i bespoke the announceme
 
 ___________________________
 
ou cannot make us hate each other.  and i defy you to hurt him
when i am by, and i defy you to frighten me!'

'you are a boastful champion,' replied heathcliff; 'but i don't like you
well enough to hurt him: you shall get the full benefit of the torment,
as long as it lasts.  it is not i who will make him hateful to you--it is
his own sweet spirit.  he's as bitter as gall at your desertion and its
consequences: don't expect thanks for this noble devotion.  i heard him
draw a pleasant picture to zillah of what he would do if he were as
strong as i: the inclination is there, and his very weakness will sharpen
his wits to find a substitute for strength.'

'i know he has a bad nature,' said catherine: 'he's your son.  but i'm
glad i've a better, to forgive it; and i know he loves me, and for that
reason i love him.  mr. heathcliff _you_ have _nobody_ to love you; and,
however miserable you make us, we shall still have the revenge of
thinking that your cruelty arises from your greater misery.  yo
 
 ___________________________
 
e devil, and envious like him?
_nobody_ loves you--_nobody_ will cry for you when you die!  i wouldn't
be you!'

catherine spoke with a kind of dreary triumph: she seemed to have made up
her mind to enter into the spirit of her future family, and draw pleasure
from the griefs of her enemies.

'you shall be sorry to be yourself presently,' said her father-in-law,
'if you stand there another minute.  begone, witch, and get your things!'

she scornfully withdrew.  in her absence i began to beg for zillah's
place at the heights, offering to resign mine to her; but he would suffer
it on no account.  he bid me be silent; and then, for the first time,
allowed himself a glance round the room and a look at the pictures.
having studied mrs. linton's, he said--'i shall have that home.  not
because i need it, but--'  he turned abruptly to the fire, and continued,
with what, for lack of a better word, i must call a smile--'i'll tell you
what i did yesterday!  i got the sexton, who was digging linton's gr
 
 ___________________________
 
my heart,
she obeyed.  i watched them, from the window, walk down the garden.
heathcliff fixed catherine's arm under his: though she disputed the act
at first evidently; and with rapid strides he hurried her into the alley,
whose trees concealed them.




chapter xxx


i have paid a visit to the heights, but i have not seen her since she
left: joseph held the door in his hand when i called to ask after her,
and wouldn't let me pass.  he said mrs. linton was 'thrang,' and the
master was not in.  zillah has told me something of the way they go on,
otherwise i should hardly know who was dead and who living.  she thinks
catherine haughty, and does not like her, i can guess by her talk.  my
young lady asked some aid of her when she first came; but mr. heathcliff
told her to follow her own business, and let his daughter-in-law look
after herself; and zillah willingly acquiesced, being a narrow-minded,
selfish woman.  catherine evinced a child's annoyance at this neglect;
repaid it with contempt, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd thus enlisted my informant among her
enemies, as securely as if she had done her some great wrong.  i had a
long talk with zillah about six weeks ago, a little before you came, one
day when we foregathered on the moor; and this is what she told me.

'the first thing mrs. linton did,' she said, 'on her arrival at the
heights, was to run up-stairs, without even wishing good-evening to me
and joseph; she shut herself into linton's room, and remained till
morning.  then, while the master and earnshaw were at breakfast, she
entered the house, and asked all in a quiver if the doctor might be sent
for? her cousin was very ill.


 
 ___________________________
 
he body to his chamber, and told me to
return to mine, and mrs. heathcliff remained by herself.

'in the morning, he sent me to tell her she must come down to breakfast:
she had undressed, and appeared going to sleep, and said she was ill; at
which i hardly wondered.  i informed mr. heathcliff, and he
replied,--"well, let her be till after the funeral; and go up now and
then to get her what is needful; and, as soon as she seems better, tell
me."'

cathy stayed upstairs a fortnight, according to zillah; who visited her
twice a day, and would have been rather more friendly, but her attempts
at increasing kindness were proudly and promptly repelled.

heathcliff went up once, to show her linton's will.  he had bequeathed
the whole of his, and what had been her, moveable property, to his
father: the poor creature was threatened, or coaxed, into that act during
her week's absence, when his uncle died.  the lands, being a minor, he
could not meddle with.  however, mr. heathcliff has claimed and kep
 
 ___________________________
 
t them
in his wife's right and his also: i suppose legally; at any rate,
catherine, destitute of cash and friends, cannot disturb his possession.

'nobody,' said zillah, 'ever approached her door, except that once, but
i; and nobody asked anything about her.  the first occasion of her coming
down into the house was on a sunday afternoon.  she had cried out, when i
carried up her dinner, that she couldn't bear any longer being in the
cold; and i told her the master was going to thrushcross grange, and
earnshaw and i needn't hinder her from descending; so, as soon as she
heard heathcliff's horse trot off, she made her appearance, donned in
black, and her yellow 
 
 ___________________________
 
 so he had as good leave his
guns and bits of indoor work alone, while she stayed.  he coloured up at
the news, and cast his eyes over his hands and clothes.  the train-oil
and gunpowder were shoved out of sight in a minute.  i saw he meant to
give her his company; and i guessed, by his way, he wanted to be
presentable; so, laughing, as i durst not laugh when the master is by, i
offered to help him, if he would, and joked at his confusion.  he grew
sullen, and began to swear.

'now, mrs. dean,' zillah went on, seeing me not pleased by her manner,
'you happen think your young lady too fine for mr. hareton; and happen
you're right: but i own i should love well to bring her pride a peg
lower.  and what will all her learning and her daintiness do for her,
now?  she's as poor as you or i: poorer, i'll be bound: you're saying,
and i'm doing my little all that road.'

hareton allowed zillah to give him her aid; and she flattered him into a
good humour; so, when catherine came, half forgetting her f
 
 ___________________________
 
t have stuck a knife into her neck, she started round in such a
taking.

'"get away this moment!  how dare you touch me?  why are you stopping
there?" she cried, in a tone of disgust.  "i can't endure you!  i'll go
upstairs again, if you come near me."

'mr. hareton recoiled, looking as foolish as he could do: he sat down in
the settle very quiet, and she continued turning over her volumes another
half hour; finally, earnshaw crossed over, and whispered to me.

'"will you ask her to read to us, zillah?  i'm stalled of doing naught;
and i do like--i could like to hear her!  dunnot say i wanted it, but ask
of yourseln."

'"mr. hareton wishes you would read to us, ma'am," i said, immediately.
"he'd take it very kind--he'd be much obliged."

'she frowned; and looking up, answered--

'"mr. hareton, and the whole set of you, will be good enough to
understand that i reject any pretence at kindness you have the hypocrisy
to offer!  i despise you, and will have nothing to say to any of you!
when i wo
 
 ___________________________
 
 to
condescend to our company, more and more.  however, i took care there
should be no further scorning at my good nature: ever since, i've been as
stiff as herself; and she has no lover or liker among us: and she does
not deserve one; for, let them say the least word to her, and she'll curl
back without respect of any one.  she'll snap at the master himself, and
as good as dares him to thrash her; and the more hurt she gets, the more
venomous she grows.'

at first, on hearing this account from zillah, i determined to leave my
situation, take a cottage, and get catherine to come and live with me:
but mr. heathcliff would as soon permit that as he would set up hareton
in an independent house; and i can see no remedy, at present, unless she
could marry again; and that scheme it does not come within my province to
arrange.

* * * * *

thus ended mrs. dean's story.  notwithstanding the doctor's prophecy, i
am rapidly recovering strength; and though it be only the second week in
january, i propos
 
 ___________________________
 
"fairy annie's wedding"--a bonny tune--it goes to
a dance.'

mrs. dean was about to recommence, when i advanced; and recognising me
directly, she jumped to her feet, crying--'why, bless you, mr. lockwood!
how could you think of returning in this way?  all's shut up at
thrushcross grange.  you should have given us notice!'

'i've arranged to be accommodated there, for as long as i shall stay,' i
answered.  'i depart again to-morrow.  and how are you transplanted here,
mrs. dean? tell me that.'

'zillah left, and mr. heathcliff wished me to come, soon after you went
to london, and stay till you returned.  but, step in, pray! have you
walked from gimmerton this evening?'

'from the grange,' i replied; 'and while they make me lodging room there,
i want to finish my business with your master; because i don't think of
having another opportunity in a hurry.'

'what business, sir?' said nelly, conducting me into the house. 'he's
gone out at present, and won't return soon.'

'about the rent,' i answe