 on a vast oak dresser, to the very roof.  the latter had never been
under-drawn: its entire anatomy lay bare to an inquiring eye, except
where a frame of wood laden with oatcakes and clusters of legs of beef,
mutton, and ham, concealed it.  above the chimney were sundry villainous
old guns, and a couple of horse-pistols: and, by way of ornament, three
gaudily-painted canisters disposed along its ledge.  the floor was of
smooth, white stone; the chairs, high-backed, primitive structures,
painted green: one or two heavy black ones lurking in the shade.  in an
arch under the dresser reposed a huge, liver-coloured bitch pointer,
surrounded by a swarm of squealing puppies; and other dogs haunted other
recesses.

the apartment and furniture would have been nothing extraordinary as
belonging to a homely, northern farmer, with a stubborn countenance, and
stalwart limbs set out to advantage in knee-breeches and gaiters.  such
an individual seated in his arm-chair, his mug of ale frothing on the
roun
 
 ___________________________
 
ding it.  have you been for a
soldier?'

'go and carry my message,' he interrupted, impatiently.  'i'm in hell
till you do!'

he lifted the latch, and i entered; but when i got to the parlour where
mr. and mrs. linton were, i could not persuade myself to proceed.  at
length i resolved on making an excuse to ask if they would have the
candles lighted, and i opened the door.

they sat together in a window whose lattice lay back against the wall,
and displayed, beyond the garden trees, and the wild green park, the
valley of gimmerton, with a long line of mist winding nearly to its top
(for very soon after you pass the chapel, as you may have noticed, the
sough that runs from the marshes joins a beck which follows the bend of
the glen).  wuthering heights rose above this silvery vapour; but our old
house was invisible; it rather dips down on the other side.  both the
room and its occupants, and the scene they gazed on, looked wondrously
peaceful.  i shrank reluctantly from performing my errand; 
 
 ___________________________
 
 own.  i twisted the two, and enclosed them
together.

mr. earnshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains of his sister
to the grave; he sent no excuse, but he never came; so that, besides her
husband, the mourners were wholly composed of tenants and servants.
isabella was not asked.

the place of catherine's interment, to the surprise of the villagers, was
neither in the chapel under the carved monument of the lintons, nor yet
by the tombs of her own relations, outside.  it was dug on a green slope
in a corner of the kirk-yard, where the wall is so low that heath and
bilberry-plants have climbed over it from the moor; and peat-mould almost
buries it.  her husband lies in the same spot now; and they have each a
simple headstone above, and a plain grey block at their feet, to mark the
graves.




chapter xvii


that friday made the last of our fine days for a month.  in the evening
the weather broke: the wind shifted from south to north-east, and brought
rain first, and then sleet and
 
 ___________________________
 
i replied, 'and it is not quite so large,
but you can see the country beautifully all round; and the air is
healthier for you--fresher and drier.  you will, perhaps, think the
building old and dark at first; though it is a respectable house: the
next best in the neighbourhood.  and you will have such nice rambles on
the moors.  hareton earnshaw--that is, miss cathy's other cousin, and so
yours in a manner--will show you all the sweetest spots; and you can
bring a book in fine weather, and make a green hollow your study; and,
now and then, your uncle may join you in a walk: he does, frequently,
walk out on the hills.'

'and what is my father like?' he asked.  'is he as young and handsome as
uncle?'

'he's as young,' said i; 'but he has black hair and eyes, and looks
sterner; and he is taller and bigger altogether.  he'll not seem to you
so gentle and kind at first, perhaps, because it is not his way: still,
mind you, be frank and cordial with him; and naturally he'll be fonder of
you than any
 
 ___________________________
 
 summer.  i needn't repeat that, because you
would call it silly.

'one time, however, we were near quarrelling.  he said the pleasantest
manner of spending a hot july day was lying from morning till evening on
a bank of heath in the middle of the moors, with the bees humming
dreamily about among the bloom, and the larks singing high up overhead,
and the blue sky and bright sun shining steadily and cloudlessly.  that
was his most perfect idea of heaven's happiness: mine was rocking in a
rustling green tree, with a west wind blowing, and bright white clouds
flitting rapidly above; and not only larks, but throstles, and
blackbirds, and linnets, and cuckoos pouring out music on every side, and
the moors seen at a distance, broken into cool dusky dells; but close by
great swells of long grass undulating in waves to the breeze; and woods
and sounding water, and the whole world awake and wild with joy.  he
wanted all to lie in an ecstasy of peace; i wanted all to sparkle and
dance in a glorious ju
 
 ___________________________
 
 i begin to shrink, and fear it.  i thought the memory of
the hour i came down that glen a bridegroom would be less sweet than the
anticipation that i was soon, in a few months, or, possibly, weeks, to be
carried up, and laid in its lonely hollow!  ellen, i've been very happy
with my little cathy: through winter nights and summer days she was a
living hope at my side.  but i've been as happy musing by myself among
those stones, under that old church: lying, through the long june
evenings, on the green mound of her mother's grave, and wishing--yearning
for the time when i might lie beneath it.  what can i do for cathy?  how
must i quit her?  i'd not care one moment for linton being heathcliff's
son; nor for his taking her from me, if he could console her for my loss.
i'd not care that heathcliff gained his ends, and triumphed in robbing me
of my last blessing!  but should linton be unworthy--only a feeble tool
to his father--i cannot abandon her to him!  and, hard though it be to
crush her bu
 
 ___________________________
 
instead of leaving
catherine's fortune at her own disposal, he determined to put it in the
hands of trustees for her use during life, and for her children, if she
had any, after her.  by that means, it could not fall to mr. heathcliff
should linton die.

having received his orders, i despatched a man to fetch the attorney, and
four more, provided with serviceable weapons, to demand my young lady of
her jailor.  both parties were delayed very late.  the single servant
returned first.  he said mr. green, the lawyer, was out when he arrived
at his house, and he had to wait two hours for his re-entrance; and then
mr. green told him he had a little business in the village that must be
done; but he would be at thrushcross grange before morning.  the four men
came back unaccompanied also.  they brought word that catherine was ill:
too ill to quit her room; and heathcliff would not suffer them to see
her.  i scolded the stupid fellows well for listening to that tale, which
i would not carry to my ma
 
 ___________________________
 
 resolving to take a whole bevy up to the
heights, at day-light, and storm it literally, unless the prisoner were
quietly surrendered to us.  her father _shall_ see her, i vowed, and
vowed again, if that devil be killed on his own doorstones in trying to
prevent it!

happily, i was spared the journey and the trouble.  i had gone
down-stairs at three o'clock to fetch a jug of water; and was passing
through the hall with it in my hand, when a sharp knock at the front door
made me jump.  'oh! it is green,' i said, recollecting myself--'only
green,' and i went on, intending to send somebody else to open it; but
the knock was repeated: not loud, and still importunately.  i put the jug
on the banister and hastened to admit him myself.  the harvest moon shone
clear outside.  it was not the attorney.  my own sweet little mistress
sprang on my neck sobbing, 'ellen, ellen!  is papa alive?'

'yes,' i cried: 'yes, my angel, he is, god be thanked, you are safe with
us again!'

she wanted to run, breathle
 
 ___________________________
 
, and would still have remained brooding over that deathbed,
but i insisted on her coming away and taking some repose.  it was well i
succeeded in removing her, for at dinner-time appeared the lawyer, having
called at wuthering heights to get his instructions how to behave.  he
had sold himself to mr. heathcliff: that was the cause of his delay in
obeying my master's summons.  fortunately, no thought of worldly affairs
crossed the latter's mind, to disturb him, after his daughter's arrival.

mr. green took upon himself to order everything and everybody about the
place.  he gave all the servants but me, notice to quit.  he would have
carried his delegated authority to the point of insisting that edgar
linton should not be buried beside his wife, but in the chapel, with his
family.  there was the will, however, to hinder that, and my loud
protestations against any infringement of its directions.  the funeral
was hurried over; catherine, mrs. linton heathcliff now, was suffered to
stay at the g
 
 ___________________________
 
tic than a fairy
tale it would have been for mrs. linton heathcliff, had she and i struck
up an attachment, as her good nurse desired, and migrated together into
the stirring atmosphere of the town!'




chapter xxxii


1802.--this september i was invited to devastate the moors of a friend in
the north, and on my journey to his abode, i unexpectedly came within
fifteen miles of gimmerton.  the ostler at a roadside public-house was
holding a pail of water to refresh my horses, when a cart of very green
oats, newly reaped, passed by, and he remarked,--'yon's frough gimmerton,
nah!  they're allas three wick' after other folk wi' ther harvest.'

'gimmerton?' i repeated--my residence in that locality had already grown
dim and dreamy.  'ah!  i know.  how far is it from this?'

'happen fourteen mile o'er th' hills; and a rough road,' he answered.

a sudden impulse seized me to visit thrushcross grange.  it was scarcely
noon, and i conceived that i might as well pass the night under my own
roof as i
 
 ___________________________
 
d meeting us at
meals; yet he would not consent formally to exclude hareton and cathy.  he
had an aversion to yielding so completely to his feelings, choosing
rather to absent himself; and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed
sufficient sustenance for him.

one night, after the family were in bed, i heard him go downstairs, and
out at the front door.  i did not hear him re-enter, and in the morning i
found he was still away.  we were in april then: the weather was sweet
and warm, the grass as green as showers and sun could make it, and the
two dwarf apple-trees near the southern wall in full bloom.  after
breakfast, catherine insisted on my bringing a chair and sitting with my
work under the fir-trees at the end of the house; and she beguiled
hareton, who had perfectly recovered from his accident, to dig and
arrange her little garden, which was shifted to that corner by the
influence of joseph's complaints.  i was comfortably revelling in the
spring fragrance around, and the beautiful sof
 
 ___________________________
 
nt a candle to take up-stairs:
you might have lit one at this fire.'

'no, i don't wish to go up-stairs,' he said.  'come in, and kindle _me_ a
fire, and do anything there is to do about the room.'

'i must blow the coals red first, before i can carry any,' i replied,
getting a chair and the bellows.

he roamed to and fro, meantime, in a state approaching distraction; his
heavy sighs succeeding each other so thick as to leave no space for
common breathing between.

'when day breaks i'll send for green,' he said; 'i wish to make some
legal inquiries of him while i can bestow a thought on those matters, and
while i can act calmly.  i have not written my will yet; and how to leave
my property i cannot determine.  i wish i could annihilate it from the
face of the earth.'

'i would not talk so, mr. heathcliff,' i interposed. 'let your will be a
while: you'll be spared to repent of your many injustices yet! i never
expected that your nerves would be disordered: they are, at present,
marvellously s
 
 ___________________________
 
ed only look at yourself in a
glass to see how you require both. your cheeks are hollow, and your eyes
blood-shot, like a person starving with hunger and going blind with loss
of sleep.'

'it is not my fault that i cannot eat or rest,' he replied.  'i assure
you it is through no settled designs.  i'll do both, as soon as i
possibly can.  but you might as well bid a man struggling in the water
rest within arms' length of the shore!  i must reach it first, and then
i'll rest.  well, never mind mr. green: as to repenting of my injustices,
i've done no injustice, and i repent of nothing.  i'm too happy; and yet
i'm not happy enough.  my soul's bliss kills my body, but does not
satisfy itself.'

'happy, master?' i cried.  'strange happiness!  if you would hear me
without being angry, i might offer some advice that would make you
happier.'

'what is that?' he asked.  'give it.'

'you are aware, mr. heathcliff,' i said, 'that from the time you were
thirteen years old you have lived a selfish, unchr
 
 ___________________________
 
t of his having swallowed nothing for four days,
fearing it might lead to trouble, and then, i am persuaded, he did not
abstain on purpose: it was the consequence of his strange illness, not
the cause.

we buried him, to the scandal of the whole neighbourhood, as he wished.
earnshaw and i, the sexton, and six men to carry the coffin, comprehended
the whole attendance.  the six men departed when they had let it down
into the grave: we stayed to see it covered.  hareton, with a streaming
face, dug green sods, and laid them over the brown mould himself: at
present it is as smooth and verdant as its companion mounds--and i hope
its tenant sleeps as soundly.  but the country folks, if you ask them,
would swear on the bible that he _walks_: there are those who speak to
having met him near the church, and on the moor, and even within this
house.  idle tales, you'll say, and so say i.  yet that old man by the
kitchen fire affirms he has seen two on 'em looking out of his chamber
window on every rain