o between them.
the idiots! that was their pleasure! to quarrel who should hold a heap
of warm hair, and each begin to cry because both, after struggling to
get it, refused to take it. we laughed outright at the petted things; we
did despise them! when would you catch me wishing to have what catherine
wanted? or find us by ourselves, seeking entertainment in yelling, and
sobbing, and rolling on the ground, divided by the whole room? i'd not
exchange, for a thousand lives, my condition here, for edgar linton's at
thrushcross grange--not if i might have the privilege of flinging joseph
off the highest gable, and painting the house-front with hindley's
blood!'

'hush, hush!' i interrupted.  'still you have not told me, heathcliff,
how catherine is left behind?'

'i told you we laughed,' he answered. 'the lintons heard us, and with
one accord they shot like arrows to the door; there was silence, and
then a cry, "oh, mamma, mamma! oh, papa! oh, mamma, come here. oh, papa,
oh!" they really did howl out 
 
 ___________________________
 
ess to the country to hang him at once, before he
shows his nature in acts as well as features?" he pulled me under the
chandelier, and mrs. linton placed her spectacles on her nose and raised
her hands in horror. the cowardly children crept nearer also, isabella
lisping--"frightful thing! put him in the cellar, papa. he's exactly
like the son of the fortune-teller that stole my tame pheasant. isn't
he, edgar?"

'while they examined me, cathy came round; she heard the last speech, and
laughed.  edgar linton, after an inquisitive stare, collected sufficient
wit to recognise her.  they see us at church, you know, though we seldom
meet them elsewhere.  "that's miss earnshaw?" he whispered to his mother,
"and look how skulker has bitten her--how her foot bleeds!"

'"miss earnshaw?  nonsense!" cried the dame; "miss earnshaw scouring the
country with a gipsy!  and yet, my dear, the child is in mourning--surely
it is--and she may be lamed for life!"

'"what culpable carelessness in her brother!" exclaime
 
 ___________________________
 
y
than she.'

'yes: you had the reason of going to bed with a proud heart and an empty
stomach,' said i.  'proud people breed sad sorrows for themselves.  but,
if you be ashamed of your touchiness, you must ask pardon, mind, when she
comes in.  you must go up and offer to kiss her, and say--you know best
what to say; only do it heartily, and not as if you thought her converted
into a stranger by her grand dress.  and now, though i have dinner to get
ready, i'll steal time to arrange you so that edgar linton shall look
quite a doll beside you: and that he does.  you are younger, and yet,
i'll be bound, you are taller and twice as broad across the shoulders;
you could knock him down in a twinkling; don't you feel that you could?'

heathcliff's face brightened a moment; then it was overcast afresh, and
he sighed.

'but, nelly, if i knocked him down twenty times, that wouldn't make him
less handsome or me more so.  i wish i had light hair and a fair skin,
and was dressed and behaved as well, and had a
 
 ___________________________
 
ir windows boldly, but lurk glinting under them, like
devil's spies?  wish and learn to smooth away the surly wrinkles, to
raise your lids frankly, and change the fiends to confident, innocent
angels, suspecting and doubting nothing, and always seeing friends where
they are not sure of foes.  don't get the expression of a vicious cur
that appears to know the kicks it gets are its dessert, and yet hates all
the world, as well as the kicker, for what it suffers.'

'in other words, i must wish for edgar linton's great blue eyes and even
forehead,' he replied.  'i do--and that won't help me to them.'

'a good heart will help you to a bonny face, my lad,' i continued, 'if
you were a regular black; and a bad one will turn the bonniest into
something worse than ugly.  and now that we've done washing, and combing,
and sulking--tell me whether you don't think yourself rather handsome?
i'll tell you, i do.  you're fit for a prince in disguise.  who knows but
your father was emperor of china, and your mother
 
 ___________________________
 
d bad companions formed a pretty example for
catherine and heathcliff.  his treatment of the latter was enough to make
a fiend of a saint.  and, truly, it appeared as if the lad _were_
possessed of something diabolical at that period.  he delighted to
witness hindley degrading himself past redemption; and became daily more
notable for savage sullenness and ferocity.  i could not half tell what
an infernal house we had.  the curate dropped calling, and nobody decent
came near us, at last; unless edgar linton's visits to miss cathy might
be an exception.  at fifteen she was the queen of the country-side; she
had no peer; and she did turn out a haughty, headstrong creature!  i own
i did not like her, after infancy was past; and i vexed her frequently by
trying to bring down her arrogance: she never took an aversion to me,
though.  she had a wondrous constancy to old attachments: even heathcliff
kept his hold on her affections unalterably; and young linton, with all
his superiority, found it difficult
 
 ___________________________
 
ere
gone.'

'hindley does not often free us from his accursed presence,' observed the
boy.  'i'll not work any more to-day: i'll stay with you.'

'oh, but joseph will tell,' she suggested; 'you'd better go!'

'joseph is loading lime on the further side of penistone crags; it will
take him till dark, and he'll never know.'

so, saying, he lounged to the fire, and sat down.  catherine reflected an
instant, with knitted brows--she found it needful to smooth the way for
an intrusion.  'isabella and edgar linton talked of calling this
afternoon,' she said, at the conclusion of a minute's silence.  'as it
rains, i hardly expect them; but they may come, and if they do, you run
the risk of being scolded for no good.'

'order ellen to say you are engaged, cathy,' he persisted; 'don't turn me
out for those pitiful, silly friends of yours!  i'm on the point,
sometimes, of complaining that they--but i'll not--'

'that they what?' cried catherine, gazing at him with a troubled
countenance.  'oh, nelly!' she ad
 
 ___________________________
 
nt.  the
insulted visitor moved to the spot where he had laid his hat, pale and
with a quivering lip.

'that's right!' i said to myself.  'take warning and begone!  it's a
kindness to let you have a glimpse of her genuine disposition.'

'where are you going?' demanded catherine, advancing to the door.

he swerved aside, and attempted to pass.

'you must not go!' she exclaimed, energetically.

'i must and shall!' he replied in a subdued voice.

'no,' she persisted, grasping the handle; 'not yet, edgar linton: sit
down; you shall not leave me in that temper.  i should be miserable all
night, and i won't be miserable for you!'

'can i stay after you have struck me?' asked linton.

catherine was mute.

'you've made me afraid and ashamed of you,' he continued; 'i'll not come
here again!'

her eyes began to glisten and her lids to twinkle.

'and you told a deliberate untruth!' he said.

'i didn't!' she cried, recovering her speech; 'i did nothing
deliberately.  well, go, if you please--get away!  and no
 
 ___________________________
 
 very unhappy!'

'a pity,' observed i.  'you're hard to please; so many friends and so few
cares, and can't make yourself content!'

'nelly, will you keep a secret for me?' she pursued, kneeling down by me,
and lifting her winsome eyes to my face with that sort of look which
turns off bad temper, even when one has all the right in the world to
indulge it.

'is it worth keeping?' i inquired, less sulkily.

'yes, and it worries me, and i must let it out!  i want to know what i
should do.  to-day, edgar linton has asked me to marry him, and i've
given him an answer.  now, before i tell you whether it was a consent or
denial, you tell me which it ought to have been.'

'really, miss catherine, how can i know?' i replied.  'to be sure,
considering the exhibition you performed in his presence this afternoon,
i might say it would be wise to refuse him: since he asked you after
that, he must either be hopelessly stupid or a venturesome fool.'

'if you talk so, i won't tell you any more,' she returned, peev
 
 ___________________________
 
e!  i'll go to
bed,' i interrupted again.

she laughed, and held me down; for i made a motion to leave my chair.

'this is nothing,' cried she: 'i was only going to say that heaven did
not seem to be my home; and i broke my heart with weeping to come back to
earth; and the angels were so angry that they flung me out into the
middle of the heath on the top of wuthering heights; where i woke sobbing
for joy.  that will do to explain my secret, as well as the other.  i've
no more business to marry edgar linton than i have to be in heaven; and
if the wicked man in there had not brought heathcliff so low, i shouldn't
have thought of it.  it would degrade me to marry heathcliff now; so he
shall never know how i love him: and that, not because he's handsome,
nelly, but because he's more myself than i am.  whatever our souls are
made of, his and mine are the same; and linton's is as different as a
moonbeam from lightning, or frost from fire.'

ere this speech ended i became sensible of heathcliff's presen
 
 ___________________________
 
side!  it's bonny
behaviour, lurking amang t' fields, after twelve o' t' night, wi' that
fahl, flaysome divil of a gipsy, heathcliff!  they think _i'm_ blind; but
i'm noan: nowt ut t' soart!--i seed young linton boath coming and going,
and i seed _yah_' (directing his discourse to me), 'yah gooid fur nowt,
slattenly witch! nip up and bolt into th' house, t' minute yah heard t'
maister's horse-fit clatter up t' road.'

'silence, eavesdropper!' cried catherine; 'none of your insolence before
me!  edgar linton came yesterday by chance, hindley; and it was _i_ who
told him to be off: because i knew you would not like to have met him as
you were.'

'you lie, cathy, no doubt,' answered her brother, 'and you are a
confounded simpleton!  but never mind linton at present: tell me, were
you not with heathcliff last night?  speak the truth, now.  you need not
be afraid of harming him: though i hate him as much as ever, he did me a
good turn a short time since that will make my conscience tender of
breaking h
 
 ___________________________
 
nd his
companions she kept aloof; and tutored by kenneth, and serious threats of
a fit that often attended her rages, her brother allowed her whatever she
pleased to demand, and generally avoided aggravating her fiery temper.  he
was rather too indulgent in humouring her caprices; not from affection,
but from pride: he wished earnestly to see her bring honour to the family
by an alliance with the lintons, and as long as she let him alone she
might trample on us like slaves, for aught he cared!  edgar linton, as
multitudes have been before and will be after him, was infatuated: and
believed himself the happiest man alive on the day he led her to
gimmerton chapel, three years subsequent to his father's death.

much against my inclination, i was persuaded to leave wuthering heights
and accompany her here. little hareton was nearly five years old, and i
had just begun to teach him his letters.  we made a sad parting; but
catherine's tears were more powerful than ours.  when i refused to go,
and when s
 
 ___________________________
 
'have you seen your mistress?'

'yes; she's in the kitchen, sir,' i answered.  'she's sadly put out by
mr. heathcliff's behaviour: and, indeed, i do think it's time to arrange
his visits on another footing.  there's harm in being too soft, and now
it's come to this--.'  and i related the scene in the court, and, as near
as i dared, the whole subsequent dispute.  i fancied it could not be very
prejudicial to mrs. linton; unless she made it so afterwards, by assuming
the defensive for her guest.  edgar linton had difficulty in hearing me
to the close.  his first words revealed that he did not clear his wife of
blame.

'this is insufferable!' he exclaimed.  'it is disgraceful that she should
own him for a friend, and force his company on me!  call me two men out
of the hall, ellen.  catherine shall linger no longer to argue with the
low ruffian--i have humoured her enough.'

he descended, and bidding the servants wait in the passage, went,
followed by me, to the kitchen.  its occupants had recommence
 
 ___________________________
 
owned.  'it is
nothing, is it, ellen dean?' he said sternly.  'you shall account more
clearly for keeping me ignorant of this!'  and he took his wife in his
arms, and looked at her with anguish.

at first she gave him no glance of recognition: he was invisible to her
abstracted gaze.  the delirium was not fixed, however; having weaned her
eyes from contemplating the outer darkness, by degrees she centred her
attention on him, and discovered who it was that held her.

'ah! you are come, are you, edgar linton?' she said, with angry
animation.  'you are one of those things that are ever found when least
wanted, and when you are wanted, never!  i suppose we shall have plenty
of lamentations now--i see we shall--but they can't keep me from my
narrow home out yonder: my resting-place, where i'm bound before spring
is over!  there it is: not among the lintons, mind, under the
chapel-roof, but in the open air, with a head-stone; and you may please
yourself whether you go to them or come to me!'

'catherin
 
 ___________________________
 
ht she spends
on linton she spends a thousand on me!  at a most miserable period of my
life, i had a notion of the kind: it haunted me on my return to the
neighbourhood last summer; but only her own assurance could make me admit
the horrible idea again.  and then, linton would be nothing, nor hindley,
nor all the dreams that ever i dreamt.  two words would comprehend my
future--_death_ and _hell_: existence, after losing her, would be hell.
yet i was a fool to fancy for a moment that she valued edgar linton's
attachment more than mine.  if he loved with all the powers of his puny
being, he couldn't love as much in eighty years as i could in a day.  and
catherine has a heart as deep as i have: the sea could be as readily
contained in that horse-trough as her whole affection be monopolised by
him.  tush!  he is scarcely a degree dearer to her than her dog, or her
horse.  it is not in him to be loved like me: how can she love in him
what he has not?'

'catherine and edgar are as fond of each other as
 
 ___________________________
 
in fulfilling my determination to see catherine, and
that without delay.  i swear that i meditate no harm: i don't desire to
cause any disturbance, or to exasperate or insult mr. linton; i only wish
to hear from herself how she is, and why she has been ill; and to ask if
anything that i could do would be of use to her.  last night i was in the
grange garden six hours, and i'll return there to-night; and every night
i'll haunt the place, and every day, till i find an opportunity of
entering.  if edgar linton meets me, i shall not hesitate to knock him
down, and give him enough to insure his quiescence while i stay.  if his
servants oppose me, i shall threaten them off with these pistols.  but
wouldn't it be better to prevent my coming in contact with them, or their
master?  and you could do it so easily.  i'd warn you when i came, and
then you might let me in unobserved, as soon as she was alone, and watch
till i departed, your conscience quite calm: you would be hindering
mischief.'

i protested a
 
 ___________________________
 
l partiality) the
securing his estate to his own daughter, instead of his son's.  an
unwelcomed infant it was, poor thing!  it might have wailed out of life,
and nobody cared a morsel, during those first hours of existence.  we
redeemed the neglect afterwards; but its beginning was as friendless as
its end is likely to be.

next morning--bright and cheerful out of doors--stole softened in through
the blinds of the silent room, and suffused the couch and its occupant
with a mellow, tender glow.  edgar linton had his head laid on the
pillow, and his eyes shut.  his young and fair features were almost as
deathlike as those of the form beside him, and almost as fixed: but _his_
was the hush of exhausted anguish, and _hers_ of perfect peace.  her brow
smooth, her lids closed, her lips wearing the expression of a smile; no
angel in heaven could be more beautiful than she appeared.  and i partook
of the infinite calm in which she lay: my mind was never in a holier
frame than while i gazed on that untroub
 
 ___________________________
 
' he demanded.

'of course--he has ordered me to take him,' i replied.

'well,' said the scoundrel, 'we'll not argue the subject now: but i have
a fancy to try my hand at rearing a young one; so intimate to your master
that i must supply the place of this with my own, if he attempt to remove
it.  i don't engage to let hareton go undisputed; but i'll be pretty sure
to make the other come!  remember to tell him.'

this hint was enough to bind our hands.  i repeated its substance on my
return; and edgar linton, little interested at the commencement, spoke no
more of interfering.  i'm not aware that he could have done it to any
purpose, had he been ever so willing.

the guest was now the master of wuthering heights: he held firm
possession, and proved to the attorney--who, in his turn, proved it to
mr. linton--that earnshaw had mortgaged every yard of land he owned for
cash to supply his mania for gaming; and he, heathcliff, was the
mortgagee.  in that manner hareton, who should now be the first gentl
 
 ___________________________
 
e looking from the window.  he
descended, nearly as eager as herself; and a considerable interval
elapsed ere they had a thought to spare for any but themselves.  while
they exchanged caresses i took a peep in to see after linton.  he was
asleep in a corner, wrapped in a warm, fur-lined cloak, as if it had been
winter.  a pale, delicate, effeminate boy, who might have been taken for
my master's younger brother, so strong was the resemblance: but there was
a sickly peevishness in his aspect that edgar linton never had.  the
latter saw me looking; and having shaken hands, advised me to close the
door, and leave him undisturbed; for the journey had fatigued him.  cathy
would fain have taken one glance, but her father told her to come, and
they walked together up the park, while i hastened before to prepare the
servants.

'now, darling,' said mr. linton, addressing his daughter, as they halted
at the bottom of the front steps: 'your cousin is not so strong or so
merry as you are, and he has lost his m
 
 ___________________________
 
iation, so very reluctantly i
went up to the library, and announced the unseasonable visitor, advising
that he should be dismissed till next day.  mr. linton had no time to
empower me to do so, for joseph mounted close at my heels, and, pushing
into the apartment, planted himself at the far side of the table, with
his two fists clapped on the head of his stick, and began in an elevated
tone, as if anticipating opposition--

'hathecliff has sent me for his lad, and i munn't goa back 'bout him.'

edgar linton was silent a minute; an expression of exceeding sorrow
overcast his features: he would have pitied the child on his own account;
but, recalling isabella's hopes and fears, and anxious wishes for her
son, and her commendations of him to his care, he grieved bitterly at the
prospect of yielding him up, and searched in his heart how it might be
avoided.  no plan offered itself: the very exhibition of any desire to
keep him would have rendered the claimant more peremptory: there was
nothing left bu
 
 ___________________________
 
tual circumstances, physical and social: in which i
partook, though i counselled her not to say much; for a second journey
would make us better judges.  my master requested an account of our
ongoings.  his nephew's offering of thanks was duly delivered, miss cathy
gently touching on the rest: i also threw little light on his inquiries,
for i hardly knew what to hide and what to reveal.




chapter xxvii


seven days glided away, every one marking its course by the henceforth
rapid alteration of edgar linton's state.  the havoc that months had
previously wrought was now emulated by the inroads of hours.  catherine
we would fain have deluded yet; but her own quick spirit refused to
delude her: it divined in secret, and brooded on the dreadful
probability, gradually ripening into certainty.  she had not the heart to
mention her ride, when thursday came round; i mentioned it for her, and
obtained permission to order her out of doors: for the library, where her
father stopped a short time daily--the br
 
 ___________________________
 
le among the ling, i looked up and saw mr. heathcliff
almost close upon us, descending the heights.  he didn't cast a glance
towards my companions, though they were sufficiently near for linton's
sobs to be audible; but hailing me in the almost hearty tone he assumed
to none besides, and the sincerity of which i couldn't avoid doubting, he
said--

'it is something to see you so near to my house, nelly.  how are you at
the grange?  let us hear.  the rumour goes,' he added, in a lower tone,
'that edgar linton is on his death-bed: perhaps they exaggerate his
illness?'

'no; my master is dying,' i replied: 'it is true enough.  a sad thing it
will be for us all, but a blessing for him!'

'how long will he last, do you think?' he asked.

'i don't know,' i said.

'because,' he continued, looking at the two young people, who were fixed
under his eye--linton appeared as if he could not venture to stir or
raise his head, and catherine could not move, on his account--'because
that lad yonder seems determined
 
 ___________________________
 
t ring of a sovereign at his feet.

my walk home was lengthened by a diversion in the direction of the kirk.
when beneath its walls, i perceived decay had made progress, even in
seven months: many a window showed black gaps deprived of glass; and
slates jutted off here and there, beyond the right line of the roof, to
be gradually worked off in coming autumn storms.

i sought, and soon discovered, the three headstones on the slope next the
moor: the middle one grey, and half buried in the heath; edgar linton's
only harmonized by the turf and moss creeping up its foot; heathcliff's
still bare.

i lingered round them, under that benign sky: watched the moths
fluttering among the heath and harebells, listened to the soft wind
breathing through the grass, and wondered how any one could ever imagine
unquiet slumbers for the sleepers in that quiet earth.
