horns all stretching their limbs one way, as if craving alms of the sun.
happily, the architect had foresight to build it strong: the narrow
windows are deeply set in the wall, and the corners defended with large
jutting stones.

before passing the threshold, i paused to admire a quantity of grotesque
carving lavished over the front, and especially about the principal door;
above which, among a wilderness of crumbling griffins and shameless
little boys, i detected the date '1500,' and the name 'hareton earnshaw.'
i would have made a few comments, and requested a short history of the
place from the surly owner; but his attitude at the door appeared to
demand my speedy entrance, or complete departure, and i had no desire to
aggravate his impatience previous to inspecting the penetralium.

one stop brought us into the family sitting-room, without any
introductory lobby or passage: they call it here 'the house'
pre-eminently.  it includes kitchen and parlour, generally; but i believe
at wuthering heights 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd smothered the storm in a brutal curse,
muttered on my behalf: which, however, i took care not to notice.

'unhappy in your conjectures, sir,' observed my host; 'we neither of us
have the privilege of owning your good fairy; her mate is dead.  i said
she was my daughter-in-law: therefore, she must have married my son.'

'and this young man is--'

'not my son, assuredly.'

heathcliff smiled again, as if it were rather too bold a jest to
attribute the paternity of that bear to him.

'my name is hareton earnshaw,' growled the other; 'and i'd counsel you to
respect it!'

'i've shown no disrespect,' was my reply, laughing internally at the
dignity with which he announced himself.

he fixed his eye on me longer than i cared to return the stare, for fear
i might be tempted either to box his ears or render my hilarity audible.
i began to feel unmistakably out of place in that pleasant family circle.
the dismal spiritual atmosphere overcame, and more than neutralised, the
glowing physical comforts round me; 
 
 ___________________________
 
 a three-inch pipe with tobacco.  my presence in
his sanctum was evidently esteemed a piece of impudence too shameful for
remark: he silently applied the tube to his lips, folded his arms, and
puffed away.  i let him enjoy the luxury unannoyed; and after sucking out
his last wreath, and heaving a profound sigh, he got up, and departed as
solemnly as he came.

a more elastic footstep entered next; and now i opened my mouth for a
'good-morning,' but closed it again, the salutation unachieved; for
hareton earnshaw was performing his orison _sotto voce_, in a series of
curses directed against every object he touched, while he rummaged a
corner for a spade or shovel to dig through the drifts.  he glanced over
the back of the bench, dilating his nostrils, and thought as little of
exchanging civilities with me as with my companion the cat.  i guessed,
by his preparations, that egress was allowed, and, leaving my hard couch,
made a movement to follow him.  he noticed this, and thrust at an inner
door with the
 
 ___________________________
 
 heathcliff, is his widow?'

'yes.'

'where did she come from originally?'

'why, sir, she is my late master's daughter: catherine linton was her
maiden name.  i nursed her, poor thing!  i did wish mr. heathcliff would
remove here, and then we might have been together again.'

'what!  catherine linton?' i exclaimed, astonished.  but a minute's
reflection convinced me it was not my ghostly catherine.  'then,' i
continued, 'my predecessor's name was linton?'

'it was.'

'and who is that earnshaw: hareton earnshaw, who lives with mr.
heathcliff?  are they relations?'

'no; he is the late mrs. linton's nephew.'

'the young lady's cousin, then?'

'yes; and her husband was her cousin also: one on the mother's, the other
on the father's side: heathcliff married mr. linton's sister.'

'i see the house at wuthering heights has "earnshaw" carved over the
front door.  are they an old family?'

'very old, sir; and hareton is the last of them, as our miss cathy is of
us--i mean, of the lintons.  have you been to w
 
 ___________________________
 
nquired, turning to take a last glance into the valley, whence a light
mist mounted and formed a fleecy cloud on the skirts of the blue.

'it is not so buried in trees,' i replied, 'and it is not quite so large,
but you can see the country beautifully all round; and the air is
healthier for you--fresher and drier.  you will, perhaps, think the
building old and dark at first; though it is a respectable house: the
next best in the neighbourhood.  and you will have such nice rambles on
the moors.  hareton earnshaw--that is, miss cathy's other cousin, and so
yours in a manner--will show you all the sweetest spots; and you can
bring a book in fine weather, and make a green hollow your study; and,
now and then, your uncle may join you in a walk: he does, frequently,
walk out on the hills.'

'and what is my father like?' he asked.  'is he as young and handsome as
uncle?'

'he's as young,' said i; 'but he has black hair and eyes, and looks
sterner; and he is taller and bigger altogether.  he'll not seem to yo
 
 ___________________________
 
nge; and how papa would object to my going: and
then i negotiated with him about the pony.  he is fond of reading, and he
thinks of leaving soon to get married; so he offered, if i would lend him
books out of the library, to do what i wished: but i preferred giving him
my own, and that satisfied him better.

'on my second visit linton seemed in lively spirits; and zillah (that is
their housekeeper) made us a clean room and a good fire, and told us
that, as joseph was out at a prayer-meeting and hareton earnshaw was off
with his dogs--robbing our woods of pheasants, as i heard afterwards--we
might do what we liked.  she brought me some warm wine and gingerbread,
and appeared exceedingly good-natured, and linton sat in the arm-chair,
and i in the little rocking chair on the hearth-stone, and we laughed and
talked so merrily, and found so much to say: we planned where we would
go, and what we would do in summer.  i needn't repeat that, because you
would call it silly.

'one time, however, we were near qu
 
 ___________________________
 
uld kick
him.  he answered in his vulgar accent, "it wouldn't do mitch hurt if it
did;" and surveyed its legs with a smile.  i was half inclined to make it
try; however, he moved off to open the door, and, as he raised the latch,
he looked up to the inscription above, and said, with a stupid mixture of
awkwardness and elation: "miss catherine!  i can read yon, now."

'"wonderful," i exclaimed.  "pray let us hear you--you _are_ grown
clever!"

'he spelt, and drawled over by syllables, the name--"hareton earnshaw."

'"and the figures?" i cried, encouragingly, perceiving that he came to a
dead halt.

'"i cannot tell them yet," he answered.

'"oh, you dunce!" i said, laughing heartily at his failure.

'the fool stared, with a grin hovering about his lips, and a scowl
gathering over his eyes, as if uncertain whether he might not join in my
mirth: whether it were not pleasant familiarity, or what it really was,
contempt.  i settled his doubts, by suddenly retrieving my gravity and
desiring him to walk away,
 
 ___________________________
 

would never have been so steady.  i could; and i bit my lip in spite, at
having thrown away the chance i might have had of doing something besides
staring at its smiting beauty.

the task was done, not free from further blunders; but the pupil claimed
a reward, and received at least five kisses; which, however, he
generously returned.  then they came to the door, and from their
conversation i judged they were about to issue out and have a walk on the
moors.  i supposed i should be condemned in hareton earnshaw's heart, if
not by his mouth, to the lowest pit in the infernal regions if i showed
my unfortunate person in his neighbourhood then; and feeling very mean
and malignant, i skulked round to seek refuge in the kitchen.  there was
unobstructed admittance on that side also; and at the door sat my old
friend nelly dean, sewing and singing a song; which was often interrupted
from within by harsh words of scorn and intolerance, uttered in far from
musical accents.

'i'd rayther, by th' haulf, hev' 'em
 
 ___________________________
 
--'well! what should i have done, ellen?  he
wouldn't shake hands, and he wouldn't look: i must show him some way that
i like him--that i want to be friends.'

whether the kiss convinced hareton, i cannot tell: he was very careful,
for some minutes, that his face should not be seen, and when he did raise
it, he was sadly puzzled where to turn his eyes.

catherine employed herself in wrapping a handsome book neatly in white
paper, and having tied it with a bit of ribbon, and addressed it to 'mr.
hareton earnshaw,' she desired me to be her ambassadress, and convey the
present to its destined recipient.

'and tell him, if he'll take it, i'll come and teach him to read it
right,' she said; 'and, if he refuse it, i'll go upstairs, and never
tease him again.'

i carried it, and repeated the message; anxiously watched by my employer.
hareton would not open his fingers, so i laid it on his knee.  he did not
strike it off, either.  i returned to my work.  catherine leaned her head
and arms on the table, till s
 
 ___________________________
 
rd no further distinguishable talk, but, on looking round again,
i perceived two such radiant countenances bent over the page of the
accepted book, that i did not doubt the treaty had been ratified on both
sides; and the enemies were, thenceforth, sworn allies.

the work they studied was full of costly pictures; and those and their
position had charm enough to keep them unmoved till joseph came home.  he,
poor man, was perfectly aghast at the spectacle of catherine seated on
the same bench with hareton earnshaw, leaning her hand on his shoulder;
and confounded at his favourite's endurance of her proximity: it affected
him too deeply to allow an observation on the subject that night.  his
emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs he drew, as he solemnly
spread his large bible on the table, and overlaid it with dirty
bank-notes from his pocket-book, the produce of the day's transactions.
at length he summoned hareton from his seat.

'tak' these in to t' maister, lad,' he said, 'and bide there.  i's