 fact, it formed a little closet, and
the ledge of a window, which it enclosed, served as a table.  i slid back
the panelled sides, got in with my light, pulled them together again, and
felt secure against the vigilance of heathcliff, and every one else.

the ledge, where i placed my candle, had a few mildewed books piled up in
one corner; and it was covered with writing scratched on the paint.  this
writing, however, was nothing but a name repeated in all kinds of
characters, large and small--_catherine earnshaw_, here and there varied
to _catherine heathcliff_, and then again to _catherine linton_.

in vapid listlessness i leant my head against the window, and continued
spelling over catherine earnshaw--heathcliff--linton, till my eyes
closed; but they had not rested five minutes when a glare of white
letters started from the dark, as vivid as spectres--the air swarmed with
catherines; and rousing myself to dispel the obtrusive name, i discovered
my candle-wick reclining on one of the antique
 
 ___________________________
 
 volumes, and perfuming the
place with an odour of roasted calf-skin.  i snuffed it off, and, very
ill at ease under the influence of cold and lingering nausea, sat up and
spread open the injured tome on my knee.  it was a testament, in lean
type, and smelling dreadfully musty: a fly-leaf bore the
inscription--'catherine earnshaw, her book,' and a date some quarter of a
century back.  i shut it, and took up another and another, till i had
examined all.  catherine's library was select, and its state of
dilapidation proved it to have been well used, though not altogether for
a legitimate purpose: scarcely one chapter had escaped, a pen-and-ink
commentary--at least the appearance of one--covering every morsel of
blank that the printer had left.  some were detached sentences; other
parts took the form of a regular diary, scrawled in an unformed, childish
hand.  at the top of an extra page (quite a treasure, probably, when
first lighted on) i was greatly amu
 
 ___________________________
 
sed to behold an excellent caricature
of my friend joseph,--rudely, yet powerfully sketched.  an immediate
interest kindled within me for the unknown catherine, and i began
forthwith to decipher her faded hieroglyphics.

'an awful sunday,' commenced the paragraph beneath.  'i wish my father
were back again.  hindley is a detestable substitute--his conduct to
heathcliff is atrocious--h. and i are going to rebel--we took our
initiatory step this evening.

'all day had been flooding with rain; we could not go to church, so
joseph must needs get up a congregation in the garret; and, while hindley
and his wife basked downstairs before a comfortable fire--d
 
 ___________________________
 
nt. i reached this book, and a pot of ink from a
shelf, and pushed the house-door ajar to give me light, and i have got
the time on with writing for twenty minutes; but my companion is
impatient, and proposes that we should appropriate the dairywoman's
cloak, and have a scamper on the moors, under its shelter. a pleasant
suggestion--and then, if the surly old man come in, he may believe his
prophecy verified--we cannot be damper, or colder, in the rain than we
are here.'

* * * * * *

i suppose catherine fulfilled her project, for the next sentence took up
another subject: she waxed lachrymose.

'how little did i dream that hindley would ever make me cry so!' she
wrote.  'my head aches, till i cannot keep it on the pillow; and still i
can't give over.  poor heathcliff!  hindley calls him a vagabond, and
won't let him sit with us, nor eat with us any more; and, he says, he and
i must not play together, and threatens to turn him out of the house if
we break his orders.  he has been blaming our fa
 
 ___________________________
 
e observed by me when
awake, but forgotten.  'i must stop it, nevertheless!' i muttered,
knocking my knuckles through the glass, and stretching an arm out to
seize the importunate branch; instead of which, my fingers closed on the
fingers of a little, ice-cold hand!  the intense horror of nightmare came
over me: i tried to draw back my arm, but the hand clung to it, and a
most melancholy voice sobbed, 'let me in--let me in!'  'who are you?' i
asked, struggling, meanwhile, to disengage myself.  'catherine linton,'
it replied, shiveringly (why did i think of _linton_?  i had read
_earnshaw_ twenty times for linton)--'i'm come home: i'd lost my way on
the moor!'  as it spoke, i discerned, obscurely, a child's face looking
through the window.  terror made me cruel; and, finding it useless to
attempt shaking the creature off, i pulled its wrist on to the broken
pane, and rubbed it to and fro till the blood ran down and soaked the
bedclothes: still it wailed, 'let me in!' and maintained its tenacious
 
 ___________________________
 
ou mean?' asked heathcliff, 'and what are you doing?  lie down
and finish out the night, since you _are_ here; but, for heaven's sake!
don't repeat that horrid noise: nothing could excuse it, unless you were
having your throat cut!'

'if the little fiend had got in at the window, she probably would have
strangled me!' i returned.  'i'm not going to endure the persecutions of
your hospitable ancestors again.  was not the reverend jabez branderham
akin to you on the mother's side?  and that minx, catherine linton, or
earnshaw, or however she was called--she must have been a
changeling--wicked little soul!  she told me she had been walking the
earth these twenty years: a just punishment for her mortal
transgressions, i've no doubt!'

scarcely were these words uttered when i recollected the association of
heathcliff's with catherine's name in the book, which had completely
slipped from my memory, till thus awakened.  i blushed at my
inconsideration: but, without showing further consciousness of the
 
 ___________________________
 
indow-ledge.  a
monotonous occupation, calculated to set me asleep, like counting, or--'

'what _can_ you mean by talking in this way to _me_!' thundered
heathcliff with savage vehemence.  'how--how _dare_ you, under my
roof?--god! he's mad to speak so!'  and he struck his forehead with rage.

i did not know whether to resent this language or pursue my explanation;
but he seemed so powerfully affected that i took pity and proceeded with
my dreams; affirming i had never heard the appellation of 'catherine
linton' before, but reading it often over produced an impression which
personified itself when i had no longer my imagination under control.
heathcliff gradually fell back into the shelter of the bed, as i spoke;
finally sitting down almost concealed behind it.  i guessed, however, by
his irregular and intercepted breathing, that he struggled to vanquish an
excess of violent emotion.  not liking to show him that i had heard the
conflict, i continued my toilette rather noisily, looked at my watc
 
 ___________________________
 
 i'll come in two minutes!'

i obeyed, so far as to quit the chamber; when, ignorant where the narrow
lobbies led, i stood still, and was witness, involuntarily, to a piece of
superstition on the part of my landlord which belied, oddly, his apparent
sense.  he got on to the bed, and wrenched open the lattice, bursting, as
he pulled at it, into an uncontrollable passion of tears.  'come in! come
in!' he sobbed.  'cathy, do come.  oh, do--_once_ more!  oh! my heart's
darling! hear me _this_ time, catherine, at last!'  the spectre showed a
spectre's ordinary caprice: it gave no sign of being; but the snow and
wind whirled wildly through, even reaching my station, and blowing out
the light.

there was such anguish in the gush of grief that accompanied this raving,
that my compassion made me overlook its folly, and i drew off, half angry
to have listened at all, and vexed at having related my ridiculous
nightmare, since it produced that agony; though _why_ was beyond my
comprehension.  i descended c
 
 ___________________________
 
house
than this: but he's very near--close-handed; and, if he had meant to flit
to thrushcross grange, as soon as he heard of a good tenant he could not
have borne to miss the chance of getting a few hundreds more.  it is
strange people should be so greedy, when they are alone in the world!'

'he had a son, it seems?'

'yes, he had one--he is dead.'

'and that young lady, mrs. heathcliff, is his widow?'

'yes.'

'where did she come from originally?'

'why, sir, she is my late master's daughter: catherine linton was her
maiden name.  i nursed her, poor thing!  i did wish mr. heathcliff would
remove here, and then we might have been together again.'

'what!  catherine linton?' i exclaimed, astonished.  but a minute's
reflection convinced me it was not my ghostly catherine.  'then,' i
continued, 'my predecessor's name was linton?'

'it was.'

'and who is that earnshaw: hareton earnshaw, who lives with mr.
heathcliff?  are they relations?'

'no; he is the late mrs. linton's nephew.'

'the young lad
 
 ___________________________
 
 such another walk for the three kingdoms.

'and at the end of it to be flighted to death!' he said, opening his
great-coat, which he held bundled up in his arms.  'see here, wife!  i
was never so beaten with anything in my life: but you must e'en take it
as a gift of god; though it's as dark almost as if it came from the
devil.'

we crowded round, and over miss cathy's head i had a peep at a dirty,
ragged, black-haired child; big enough both to walk and talk: indeed, its
face looked older than catherine's; yet when it was set on its feet, it
only stared round, and repeated over and over again some gibberish that
nobody could understand.  i was frightened, and mrs. earnshaw was ready
to fling it out of doors: she did fly up, asking how he could fashion to
bring that gipsy brat into the house, when they had their own bairns to
feed and fend for?  what he meant to do with it, and whether he were mad?
the master tried to explain the matter; but he was really half dead with
fatigue, and all that i 
 
 ___________________________
 
to rake the promises to himself and
fling the curses to his neighbours.  by his knack of sermonising and
pious discoursing, he contrived to make a great impression on mr.
earnshaw; and the more feeble the master became, the more influence he
gained.  he was relentless in worrying him about his soul's concerns, and
about ruling his children rigidly.  he encouraged him to regard hindley
as a reprobate; and, night after night, he regularly grumbled out a long
string of tales against heathcliff and catherine: always minding to
flatter earnshaw's weakness by heaping the heaviest blame on the latter.

certainly she had ways with her such as i never saw a child take up
before; and she put all of us past our patience fifty times and oftener
in a day: from the hour she came down-stairs till the hour she went to
bed, we had not a minute's security that she wouldn't be in mischief.  her
spirits were always at high-water mark, her tongue always going--singing,
laughing, and plaguing everybody who would not
 
 ___________________________
 
ort her.  she was much too fond of heathcliff.  the greatest
punishment we could invent for her was to keep her separate from him: yet
she got chided more than any of us on his account.  in play, she liked
exceedingly to act the little mistress; using her hands freely, and
commanding her companions: she did so to me, but i would not bear
slapping and ordering; and so i let her know.

now, mr. earnshaw did not understand jokes from his children: he had
always been strict and grave with them; and catherine, on her part, had
no idea why her father should be crosser and less patient in his ailing
condition than he was in his prime.  his peevish reproofs wakened in her
a naughty delight to provoke him: she was never so happy as when we were
all scolding her at once, and she defying us with her bold, saucy look,
and her ready words; turning joseph's religious curses into ridicule,
baiting me, and doing just what her father hated most--showing how her
pretended insolence, which he thought real, had mo
 
 ___________________________
 
eph,
having finished his chapter, got up and said that he must rouse the
master for prayers and bed.  he stepped forward, and called him by name,
and touched his shoulder; but he would not move: so he took the candle
and looked at him.  i thought there was something wrong as he set down
the light; and seizing the children each by an arm, whispered them to
'frame up-stairs, and make little din--they might pray alone that
evening--he had summut to do.'

'i shall bid father good-night first,' said catherine, putting her arms
round his neck, before we could hinder her.  the poor thing discovered
her loss directly--she screamed out--'oh, he's dead, heathcliff! he's
dead!'  and they both set up a heart-breaking cry.

i joined my wail to theirs, loud and bitter; but joseph asked what we
could be thinking of to roar in that way over a saint in heaven.  he told
me to put on my cloak and run to gimmerton for the doctor and the parson.
i could not guess the use that either would be of, then.  however, i
w
 
 ___________________________
 
ack-kitchen, and
leave the house for him. indeed, he would have carpeted and papered a
small spare room for a parlour; but his wife expressed such pleasure at
the white floor and huge glowing fireplace, at the pewter dishes and
delf-case, and dog-kennel, and the wide space there was to move about in
where they usually sat, that he thought it unnecessary to her comfort,
and so dropped the intention.

she expressed pleasure, too, at finding a sister among her new
acquaintance; and she prattled to catherine, and kissed her, and ran
about with her, and gave her quantities of presents, at the beginning.
her affection tired very soon, however, and when she grew peevish,
hindley became tyrannical.  a few words from her, evincing a dislike to
heathcliff, were enough to rouse in him all his old hatred of the boy.  he
drove him from their company to the servants, deprived him of the
instructions of the curate, and insisted that he should labour out of
doors instead; compelling him to do so as hard as any
 
 ___________________________
 
his degradation pretty well at first, because cathy
taught him what she learnt, and worked or played with him in the fields.
they both promised fair to grow up as rude as savages; the young master
being entirely negligent how they behaved, and what they did, so they
kept clear of him.  he would not even have seen after their going to
church on sundays, only joseph and the curate reprimanded his
carelessness when they absented themselves; and that reminded him to
order heathcliff a flogging, and catherine a fast from dinner or supper.
but it was one of their chief amusements to run away to the moors in the
morning and remain there all day, and the after punishment grew a mere
thing to laugh at.  the curate might set as many chapters as he pleased
for catherine to get by heart, and joseph might thrash heathcliff till
his arm ached; they forgot everything the minute they were together
again: at least the minute they had contrived some naughty plan of
revenge; and many a time i've cried to myself t
 
 ___________________________
 
night.  the household went to bed; and i,
too, anxious to lie down, opened my lattice and put my head out to
hearken, though it rained: determined to admit them in spite of the
prohibition, should they return.  in a while, i distinguished steps
coming up the road, and the light of a lantern glimmered through the
gate.  i threw a shawl over my head and ran to prevent them from waking
mr. earnshaw by knocking.  there was heathcliff, by himself: it gave me a
start to see him alone.

'where is miss catherine?' i cried hurriedly. 'no accident, i hope?' 'at
thrushcross grange,' he answered; 'and i would have been there too, but
they had not the manners to ask me to stay.' 'well, you will catch it!'
i said: 'you'll never be content till you're sent about your business.
what in the world led you wandering to thrushcross grange?' 'let me get
off my wet clothes, and i'll tell you all about it, nelly,' he replied.
i bid him beware of rousing the master, and while he undressed and i
waited to put out the c
 
 ___________________________
 
her sat eating and drinking, and singing and laughing, and
burning their eyes out before the fire. do you think they do? or reading
sermons, and being catechised by their manservant, and set to learn a
column of scripture names, if they don't answer properly?' 'probably
not,' i responded. 'they are good children, no doubt, and don't deserve
the treatment you receive, for your bad conduct.' 'don't cant, nelly,'
he said: 'nonsense! we ran from the top of the heights to the park,
without stopping--catherine completely beaten in the race, because she
was barefoot. you'll have to seek for her shoes in the bog to-morrow. we
crept through a broken hedge, groped our way up the path, and planted
ourselves on a flower-plot under the drawing-room window. the light came
from thence; they had not put up the shutters, and the curtains were
only half closed. both of us were able to look in by standing on the
basement, and clinging to the ledge, and we saw--ah! it was beautiful--a
splendid place carpeted with 
 
 ___________________________
 
her. edgar
stood on the hearth weeping silently, and in the middle of the table sat
a little dog, shaking its paw and yelping; which, from their mutual
accusations, we understood they had nearly pulled in two between them.
the idiots! that was their pleasure! to quarrel who should hold a heap
of warm hair, and each begin to cry because both, after struggling to
get it, refused to take it. we laughed outright at the petted things; we
did despise them! when would you catch me wishing to have what catherine
wanted? or find us by ourselves, seeking entertainment in yelling, and
sobbing, and rolling on the ground, divided by the whole room? i'd not
exchange, for a thousand lives, my condition here, for edgar linton's at
thrushcross grange--not if i might have the privilege of flinging joseph
off the highest gable, and painting the house-front with hindley's
blood!'

'hush, hush!' i interrupted.  'still you have not told me, heathcliff,
how catherine is left behind?'

'i told you we laughed,' he answ
 
 ___________________________
 
lected sufficient
wit to recognise her.  they see us at church, you know, though we seldom
meet them elsewhere.  "that's miss earnshaw?" he whispered to his mother,
"and look how skulker has bitten her--how her foot bleeds!"

'"miss earnshaw?  nonsense!" cried the dame; "miss earnshaw scouring the
country with a gipsy!  and yet, my dear, the child is in mourning--surely
it is--and she may be lamed for life!"

'"what culpable carelessness in her brother!" exclaimed mr. linton,
turning from me to catherine.  "i've understood from shielders"' (that
was the curate, sir) '"that he lets her grow up in absolute heathenism.
but who is this?  where did she pick up this companion?  oho! i declare
he is that strange acquisition my late neighbour made, in his journey to
liverpool--a little lascar, or an american or spanish castaway."

'"a wicked boy, at all events," remarked the old lady, "and quite unfit
for a decent house!  did you notice his language, linton?  i'm shocked
that my children should have he
 
 ___________________________
 
ard it."

'i recommenced cursing--don't be angry, nelly--and so robert was ordered
to take me off.  i refused to go without cathy; he dragged me into the
garden, pushed the lantern into my hand, assured me that mr. earnshaw
should be informed of my behaviour, and, bidding me march directly,
secured the door again.  the curtains were still looped up at one corner,
and i resumed my station as spy; because, if catherine had wished to
return, i intended shattering their great glass panes to a million of
fragments, unless they let her out.  she sat on the sofa quietly.  mrs.
linton took off the grey cloak of the dairy-maid which we had borrowed
for our excursion, shaking her head and expostulating with her, i
suppose: she was a young lady, and they made a distinction between her
treatment and mine.  then the woman-servant brought a basin of warm
water, and washed her feet; and mr. linton mixed a tumbler of negus
 
 ___________________________
 
nguishing the light.  'you are incurable,
heathcliff; and mr. hindley will have to proceed to extremities, see if
he won't.'  my words came truer than i desired.  the luckless adventure
made earnshaw furious.  and then mr. linton, to mend matters, paid us a
visit himself on the morrow, and read the young master such a lecture on
the road he guided his family, that he was stirred to look about him, in
earnest.  heathcliff received no flogging, but he was told that the first
word he spoke to miss catherine should ensure a dismissal; and mrs.
earnshaw undertook to keep her sister-in-law in due restraint when she
returned home; employing art, not force: with force she would have found
it impossible.




chapter vii


cathy stayed at thrushcross grange five weeks: till christmas.  by that
time her ankle was thoroughly cured, and her manners much improved.  the
mistress visited her often in the interval, and commenced her plan of
reform by trying to raise her self-respect with fine clothes and
flatte
 
 ___________________________
 
ts falling from the cover of a feathered beaver,
and a long cloth habit, which she was obliged to hold up with both hands
that she might sail in.  hindley lifted her from her horse, exclaiming
delightedly, 'why, cathy, you are quite a beauty!  i should scarcely have
known you: you look like a lady now.  isabella linton is not to be
compared with her, is she, frances?'  'isabella has not her natural
advantages,' replied his wife: 'but she must mind and not grow wild again
here.  ellen, help miss catherine off with her things--stay, dear, you
will disarrange your curls--let me untie your hat.'

i removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath a grand plaid silk
frock, white trousers, and burnished shoes; and, while her eyes sparkled
joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to welcome her, she dared hardly
touch them lest they should fawn upon her splendid garments.  she kissed
me gently: i was all flour making the christmas cake, and it would not
have done to give me a hug; and then she looked r
 
 ___________________________
 
ound for heathcliff.  mr.
and mrs. earnshaw watched anxiously their meeting; thinking it would
enable them to judge, in some measure, what grounds they had for hoping
to succeed in separating the two friends.

heathcliff was hard to discover, at first.  if he were careless, and
uncared for, before catherine's absence, he had been ten times more so
since.  nobody but i even did him the kindness to call him a dirty boy,
and bid him wash himself, once a week; and children of his age seldom
have a natural pleasure in soap and water.  therefore, not to mention his
clothes, which had seen three months' service in mire and dust, and his
thick uncombed hair, the surface of his face and hands was dismally
beclouded.  he might well skulk behind the settle, on beholding such a
bright, graceful damsel enter t
 
 ___________________________
 
he house, instead of a rough-headed
counterpart of himself, as he expected.  'is heathcliff not here?' she
demanded, pulling off her gloves, and displaying fingers wonderfully
whitened with doing nothing and staying indoors.

'heathcliff, you may come forward,' cried mr. hindley, enjoying his
discomfiture, and gratified to see what a forbidding young blackguard he
would be compelled to present himself.  'you may come and wish miss
catherine welcome, like the other servants.'

cathy, catching a glimpse of her friend in his concealment, flew to
embrace him; she bestowed seven or eight kisses on his cheek within the
second, and then stopped, and drawing back, burst into a laugh,
exclaiming, 'why, how very black and cross you look! and how--how funny
and grim!  but that's because i'm used to edgar and isabella linton.
well, heathcliff, have you forgotten me?'

she had some reason to put the question, for shame and pride threw double
g
 
 ___________________________
 
 all right: but you are so dirty!'

she gazed concernedly at the dusky fingers she held in her own, and also
at her dress; which she feared had gained no embellishment from its
contact with his.

'you needn't have touched me!' he answered, following her eye and
snatching away his hand.  'i shall be as dirty as i please: and i like to
be dirty, and i will be dirty.'

with that he dashed headforemost out of the room, amid the merriment of
the master and mistress, and to the serious disturbance of catherine; who
could not comprehend how her remarks should have produced such an
exhibition of bad temper.

after playing lady's-maid to the new-comer, and putting my cakes in the
oven, and making the house and kitchen cheerful with great fires,
befitting christmas-eve, i prepared to sit down and amuse myself by
singing carols, all alone; regardless of joseph's affirmations that he
considered the merry tunes i chose as next door to songs.  he had retired
to private prayer in his chamber, and mr. and mrs.
 
 ___________________________
 
 i said, 'the kitchen is so comfortable; and
joseph is up-stairs: make haste, and let me dress you smart before miss
cathy comes out, and then you can sit together, with the whole hearth to
yourselves, and have a long chatter till bedtime.'

he proceeded with his task, and never turned his head towards me.

'come--are you coming?' i continued.  'there's a little cake for each of
you, nearly enough; and you'll need half-an-hour's donning.'

i waited five minutes, but getting no answer left him.  catherine supped
with her brother and sister-in-law: joseph and i joined at an unsociable
meal, seasoned with reproofs on one side and sauciness on the other.  his
cake and cheese remained on the table all night for the fairies.  he
managed to continue work till nine o'clock, and then marched dumb and
dour to his chamber.  cathy sat up late, having a world of things to
order for the reception of her new friends: she came into the kitchen
once to speak to her old one; but he was gone, and she only stayed 
 
 ___________________________
 
to ask
what was the matter with him, and then went back.  in the morning he rose
early; and, as it was a holiday, carried his ill-humour on to the moors;
not re-appearing till the family were departed for church.  fasting and
reflection seemed to have brought him to a better spirit.  he hung about
me for a while, and having screwed up his courage, exclaimed
abruptly--'nelly, make me decent, i'm going to be good.'

'high time, heathcliff,' i said; 'you _have_ grieved catherine: she's
sorry she ever came home, i daresay!  it looks as if you envied her,
because she is more thought of than you.'

the notion of _envying_ catherine was incomprehensible to him, but the
notion of grieving her he understood clearly enough.

'did she say she was grieved?' he inquired, looking very serious.

'she cried when i told her you were off again this morning.'

'well, _i_ cried last night,' he returned, 'and i had more reason to cry
than she.'

'yes: you had the reason of going to bed 
 
 ___________________________
 
rage and
dignity to support the oppressions of a little farmer!'

so i chattered on; and heathcliff gradually lost his frown and began to
look quite pleasant, when all at once our conversation was interrupted by
a rumbling sound moving up the road and entering the court.  he ran to
the window and i to the door, just in time to behold the two lintons
descend from the family carriage, smothered in cloaks and furs, and the
earnshaws dismount from their horses: they often rode to church in
winter.  catherine took a hand of each of the children, and brought them
into the house and set them before the fire, which quickly put colour
into their white faces.

i urged my companion to hasten now and show his amiable humour, and he
willingly obeyed; but ill luck would have it that, as he opened the door
leading from the kitchen on one side, hindley opened it on the other.
they met, and the master, irritated at seeing him clean and cheerful, or,
perhaps, eager to keep his promise to mrs. linton, shoved him 
 
 ___________________________
 
rom the
doorway; 'i wonder they don't make his head ache.  it's like a colt's
mane over his eyes!'

he ventured this remark without any intention to insult; but heathcliff's
violent nature was not prepared to endure the appearance of impertinence
from one whom he seemed to hate, even then, as a rival.  he seized a
tureen of hot apple sauce (the first thing that came under his grip) and
dashed it full against the speaker's face and neck; who instantly
commenced a lament that brought isabella and catherine hurrying to the
place.  mr. earnshaw snatched up the culprit directly and conveyed him to
his chamber; where, doubtless, he administered a rough remedy to cool the
fit of passion, for he appeared red and breathless.  i got the dishcloth,
and rather spitefully scrubbed edgar's nose and mouth, affirming it
served him right for meddling.  his sister began weeping to go home, and
cathy stood by confounded, blushing for all.

'you should not have spoken to him!' she expostulated with master linton.

 
 ___________________________
 
'he was in a bad temper, and now you've spoilt your visit; and he'll be
flogged: i hate him to be flogged!  i can't eat my dinner.  why did you
speak to him, edgar?'

'i didn't,' sobbed the youth, escaping from my hands, and finishing the
remainder of the purification with his cambric pocket-handkerchief.  'i
promised mamma that i wouldn't say one word to him, and i didn't.'

'well, don't cry,' replied catherine, contemptuously; 'you're not killed.
don't make more mischief; my brother is coming: be quiet!  hush,
isabella!  has anybody hurt you?'

'there, there, children--to your seats!' cried hindley, bustling in.
'that brute of a lad has warmed me nicely.  next time, master edgar, take
the law into your own fists--it will give you an appetite!'

the little party recovered its equanimity at sight of the fragrant feast.
they were hungry after their ride, and easily consoled, since no real
harm had befal
 
 ___________________________
 
len them.  mr. earnshaw carved bountiful platefuls, and the
mistress made them merry with lively talk.  i waited behind her chair,
and was pained to behold catherine, with dry eyes and an indifferent air,
commence cutting up the wing of a goose before her.  'an unfeeling
child,' i thought to myself; 'how lightly she dismisses her old
playmate's troubles.  i could not have imagined her to be so selfish.'
she lifted a mouthful to her lips: then she set it down again: her cheeks
flushed, and the tears gushed over them.  she slipped her fork to the
floor, and hastily dived under the cloth to conceal her emotion.  i did
not call her unfeeling long; for i perceiv
 
 ___________________________
 
in the
excitement of the exercise, and our pleasure was increased by the arrival
of the gimmerton band, mustering fifteen strong: a trumpet, a trombone,
clarionets, bassoons, french horns, and a bass viol, besides singers.
they go the rounds of all the respectable houses, and receive
contributions every christmas, and we esteemed it a first-rate treat to
hear them.  after the usual carols had been sung, we set them to songs
and glees.  mrs. earnshaw loved the music, and so they gave us plenty.

catherine loved it too: but she said it sounded sweetest at the top of
the steps, and she went up in the dark: i followed. they shut the house
door below, never noting our absence, it was so full of people. she made
no stay at the stairs'-head, but mounted farther, to the garret where
heathcliff was confined, and called him. he stubbornly declined
answering for a while: she persevered, and finally persuaded him to hold
communion with her through the boards. i let the poor things converse
unmolested, till
 
 ___________________________
 
ckless dissipation.  the servants could not bear his tyrannical and
evil conduct long: joseph and i were the only two that would stay.  i had
not the heart to leave my charge; and besides, you know, i had been his
foster-sister, and excused his behaviour more readily than a stranger
would.  joseph remained to hector over tenants and labourers; and because
it was his vocation to be where he had plenty of wickedness to reprove.

the master's bad ways and bad companions formed a pretty example for
catherine and heathcliff.  his treatment of the latter was enough to make
a fiend of a saint.  and, truly, it appeared as if the lad _were_
possessed of something diabolical at that period.  he delighted to
witness hindley degrading himself past redemption; and became daily more
notable for savage sullenness and ferocity.  i could not half tell what
an infernal house we had.  the curate dropped calling, and nobody decent
came near us, at last; unless edgar linton's visits to miss cathy might
be an except
 
 ___________________________
 
place.  it used
to hang on one side, and his wife's on the other; but hers has been
removed, or else you might see something of what she was.  can you make
that out?

mrs. dean raised the candle, and i discerned a soft-featured face,
exceedingly resembling the young lady at the heights, but more pensive
and amiable in expression.  it formed a sweet picture.  the long light
hair curled slightly on the temples; the eyes were large and serious; the
figure almost too graceful.  i did not marvel how catherine earnshaw
could forget her first friend for such an individual.  i marvelled much
how he, with a mind to correspond with his person, could fancy my idea of
catherine earnshaw.

'a very agreeable portrait,' i observed to the house-keeper.  'is it
like?'

'yes,' she answered; 'but he looked better when he was animated; that is
his everyday countenance: he wanted spirit in general.'

catherine had kept up her acquaintance with the lintons since her
five-weeks' residence among them; and as she had n
 
 ___________________________
 
 that would only be laughed at, and restrain an
unruly nature when it would bring her neither credit nor praise.

mr. edgar seldom mustered courage to visit wuthering heights openly.  he
had a terror of earnshaw's reputation, and shrunk from encountering him;
and yet he was always received with our best attempts at civility: the
master himself avoided offending him, knowing why he came; and if he
could not be gracious, kept out of the way.  i rather think his
appearance there was distasteful to catherine; she was not artful, never
played the coquette, and had evidently an objection to her two friends
meeting at all; for when heathcliff expressed contempt of linton in his
presence, she could not half coincide, as she did in his absence; and
when linton evinced disgust and antipathy to heathcliff, she dared not
treat his sentiments with indifference, as if depreciation of her
playmate were of scarcely any consequence to her.  i've had many a laugh
at her perplexities and untold troubles, which sh
 
 ___________________________
 
vey an impression of inward
and outward repulsiveness that his present aspect retains no traces of.
in the first place, he had by that time lost the benefit of his early
education: continual hard work, begun soon and concluded late, had
extinguished any curiosity he once possessed in pursuit of knowledge, and
any love for books or learning.  his childhood's sense of superiority,
instilled into him by the favours of old mr. earnshaw, was faded away.  he
struggled long to keep up an equality with catherine in her studies, and
yielded with poignant though silent regret: but he yielded completely;
and there was no prevailing on him to take a step in the way of moving
upward, when he found he must, necessarily, sink beneath his former
level.  then personal appearance sympathised with mental deterioration:
he acquired a slouching gait and ignoble look; his naturally reserved
disposition was exaggerated into an almost idiotic excess of unsociable
moroseness; and he took a grim pleasure, apparently, in
 
 ___________________________
 
 exciting the
aversion rather than the esteem of his few acquaintances.

catherine and he were constant companions still at his seasons of respite
from labour; but he had ceased to express his fondness for her in words,
and recoiled with angry suspicion from her girlish caresses, as if
conscious there could be no gratification in lavishing such marks of
affection on him.  on the before-named occasion he came into the house to
announce his intention of doing nothing, while i was assisting miss cathy
to arrange her dress: she had not reckoned on his taking it into his head
to b
 
 ___________________________
 
i know of,' stammered miss: 'but you should be in the field
now, heathcliff.  it is an hour past dinnertime: i thought you were
gone.'

'hindley does not often free us from his accursed presence,' observed the
boy.  'i'll not work any more to-day: i'll stay with you.'

'oh, but joseph will tell,' she suggested; 'you'd better go!'

'joseph is loading lime on the further side of penistone crags; it will
take him till dark, and he'll never know.'

so, saying, he lounged to the fire, and sat down.  catherine reflected an
instant, with knitted brows--she found it needful to smooth the way for
an intrusion.  'isabella and edgar linton talked of calling this
afternoon,' she said, at the conclusion of a minute's silence.  'as it
rains, i hardly expect them; but they may come, and if they do, you run
the risk of being scolded for no good.'

'order ellen to say you are engaged, cathy,' he persisted; 'don't turn me
out for those pitiful, silly friends of yours!  i'm on the point,
sometimes, of complaining
 
 ___________________________
 
 that they--but i'll not--'

'that they what?' cried catherine, gazing at him with a troubled
countenance.  'oh, nelly!' she added petulantly, jerking her head away
from my hands, 'you've combed my hair quite out of curl!  that's enough;
let me alone.  what are you on the point of complaining about,
heathcliff?'

'nothing--only look at the almanack on that wall;' he pointed to a framed
sheet hanging near the window, and continued, 'the crosses are for the
evenings you have spent with the lintons, the dots for those spent with
me.  do you see?  i've marked 
 
 ___________________________
 
every day.'

'yes--very foolish: as if i took notice!' replied catherine, in a peevish
tone.  'and where is the sense of that?'

'to show that i _do_ take notice,' said heathcliff.

'and should i always be sitting with you?' she demanded, growing more
irritated.  'what good do i get?  what do you talk about?  you might be
dumb, or a baby, for anything you say to amuse me, or for anything you
do, either!'

'you never told me before that i talked too little, or that you disliked
my company, cathy!' exclaimed heathcliff, in much agitation.

'it's no company at all, whe
 
 ___________________________
 
n people know nothing and say nothing,' she
muttered.

her companion rose up, but he hadn't time to express his feelings
further, for a horse's feet were heard on the flags, and having knocked
gently, young linton entered, his face brilliant with delight at the
unexpected summon she had received.  doubtless catherine marked the
difference between her friends, as one came in and the other went out.
the contrast resembled what you see in exchanging a bleak, hilly, coal
country for a beautiful fertile valley; and his voice and greeting were
as opposite as his aspect.  he had a sweet, low manner of speaking, and
pronounced his words as you do: that's less gruff than we talk here, and
softer.

'i'm not come too soon, am i?' he said, casting a look at me: i had begun
to wipe the plate, and tidy some drawers at th
 
 ___________________________
 
e far end in the dresser.

'no,' answered catherine.  'what are you doing there, nelly?'

'my work, miss,' i replied.  (mr. hindley had given me directions to make
a third party in any private visits linton chose to pay.)

she stepped behind me and whispered crossly, 'take yourself and your
dusters off; when company are in the house, servants don't commence
scouring and cleaning in the room where they are!'

'it's a good opportunity, now that master is away,' i answered aloud: 'he
hates me to be fidgeting over these things in his presence.  i'm 
 
 ___________________________
 
sure mr.
edgar will excuse me.'

'i hate you to be fidgeting in _my_ presence,' exclaimed the young lady
imperiously, not allowing her guest time to speak: she had failed to
recover her equanimity since the little dispute with heathcliff.

'i'm sorry for it, miss catherine,' was my response; and i proceeded
assiduously with my occupation.

she, supposing edgar could not see her, snatched the cloth from my hand,
and pinched me, with a prolonged wrench, very spitefully on the arm.  i've
said i did not love her, and rather relished mortifying her vanity now
and then: besides, she hurt me extremely; so i started up from my knees,
and screamed out, 'oh, miss, that's a nasty trick!  you have no right to
nip me, and i'm not going to bear it.'

'i didn't touch you, you l
 
 ___________________________
 
ying creature!' cried she, her fingers tingling
to repeat the act, and her ears red with rage.  she never had power to
conceal her passion, it always set her whole complexion in a blaze.

'what's that, then?' i retorted, showing a decided purple witness to
refute her.

she stamped her foot, wavered a moment, and then, irresistibly impelled
by the naughty spirit within her, slapped me on the cheek: a stinging
blow that filled both eyes with water.

'catherine, love!  catherine!' interposed linton, greatly shocked at the
double fault of falsehood and violence which his idol had committed.

'leave the room, ellen!' she repeated, trembling all over.

little hareton, who followed me everywhere, and was sitting near me on
the floor, at seeing my tears commenced crying himself, and sobbed out
complaints against 'wicked aunt cathy,' which drew her fury on to his
unlucky head: she seized his shoulders, and shook him till the poor child
waxed livid, and edgar thoughtlessly la
 
 ___________________________
 
ot be mistaken for jest.
he drew back in consternation.  i lifted hareton in my arms, and walked
off to the kitchen with him, leaving the door of communication open, for
i was curious to watch how they would settle their disagreement.  the
insulted visitor moved to the spot where he had laid his hat, pale and
with a quivering lip.

'that's right!' i said to myself.  'take warning and begone!  it's a
kindness to let you have a glimpse of her genuine disposition.'

'where are you going?' demanded catherine, advancing to the door.

he swerved aside, and attempted to pass.

'you must not go!' she exclaimed, energetically.

'i must and shall!' he replied in a subdued voice.

'no,' she persisted, grasping the handle; 'not yet, edgar linton: sit
down; you shall not leave me in that temper.  i should be miserable all
night, and i won't be miserable for you!'

'can i stay after you have struck me?' asked linton.

catherine was mute.

'you've made me afraid and ashamed of you,' he continued; 'i'll not co
 
 ___________________________
 
 into the house again, shut the door behind him; and
when i went in a while after to inform them that earnshaw had come home
rabid drunk, ready to pull the whole place about our ears (his ordinary
frame of mind in that condition), i saw the quarrel had merely effected a
closer intimacy--had broken the outworks of youthful timidity, and
enabled them to forsake the disguise of friendship, and confess
themselves lovers.

intelligence of mr. hindley's arrival drove linton speedily to his horse,
and catherine to her chamber.  i went to hide little hareton, and to take
the shot out of the master's fowling-piece, which he was fond of playing
with in his insane excitement, to the hazard of the lives of any who
provoked, or even attracted his notice too much; and i had hit upon the
plan of removing it, that he might do less mischief if he did go the
length of firing the gun.




chapter ix


he entered, vociferating oaths dreadful to hear; and caught me in the act
of stowing his son away in the kitchen 
 
 ___________________________
 
 up.  the expression of her face seemed disturbed and
anxious.  her lips were half asunder, as if she meant to speak, and she
drew a breath; but it escaped in a sigh instead of a sentence.  i resumed
my song; not having forgotten her recent behaviour.

'where's heathcliff?' she said, interrupting me.

'about his work in the stable,' was my answer.

he did not contradict me; perhaps he had fallen into a doze.  there
followed another long pause, during which i perceived a drop or two
trickle from catherine's cheek to the flags.  is she sorry for her
shameful conduct?--i asked myself.  that will be a novelty: but she may
come to the point--as she will--i sha'n't help her!  no, she felt small
trouble regarding any subject, save her own concerns.

'oh, dear!' she cried at last.  'i'm very unhappy!'

'a pity,' observed i.  'you're hard to please; so many friends and so few
cares, and can't make yourself content!'

'nelly, will you keep a secret for me?' she pursued, kneeling down by me,
and lifting h
 
 ___________________________
 
er winsome eyes to my face with that sort of look which
turns off bad temper, even when one has all the right in the world to
indulge it.

'is it worth keeping?' i inquired, less sulkily.

'yes, and it worries me, and i must let it out!  i want to know what i
should do.  to-day, edgar linton has asked me to marry him, and i've
given him an answer.  now, before i tell you whether it was a consent or
denial, you tell me which it ought to have been.'

'really, miss catherine, how can i know?' i replied.  'to be sure,
considering the exhibition you performed in his presence this afternoon,
i might say it would be wise to refuse him: since he asked you after
that, he must either be hopelessly stupid or a venturesome fool.'

'if you talk so, i won't tell you any more,' she returned, peevishly
rising to her feet.  'i accepted him, nelly.  be quick, and say whether i
was wrong!'

'you accepted him!  then what good is it discussing the matter?  you have
pledged your word
 
 ___________________________
 
 now, say how you love him?'

'as everybody loves--you're silly, nelly.'

'not at all--answer.'

'i love the ground under his feet, and the air over his head, and
everything he touches, and every word he says.  i love all his looks, and
all his actions, and him entirely and altogether.  there now!'

'and why?'

'nay; you are making a jest of it: it is exceedingly ill-natured!  it's
no jest to me!' said the young lady, scowling, and turning her face to
the fire.

'i'm very far from jesting, miss catherine,' i replied.  'you love mr.
edgar because he is handsome, and young, and cheerful, and rich, and
loves you.  the last, however, goes for nothing: you would love him
without that, probably; and with it you wouldn't, unless he possessed the
four former attractions.'

'no, to be sure not: i should only pity him--hate him, perhaps, if he
were ugly, and a clown.'

'but there are several other handsome, rich young men in the world:
handsomer, possibly, and richer than he is.  what should hinder you f
 
 ___________________________
 
mission for that--i _shall_ marry him: and yet you
have not told me whether i'm right.'

'perfectly right; if people be right to marry only for the present.  and
now, let us hear what you are unhappy about.  your brother will be
pleased; the old lady and gentleman will not object, i think; you will
escape from a disorderly, comfortless home into a wealthy, respectable
one; and you love edgar, and edgar loves you.  all seems smooth and easy:
where is the obstacle?'

'_here_! and _here_!' replied catherine, striking one hand on her
forehead, and the other on her breast: 'in whichever place the soul
lives.  in my soul and in my heart, i'm convinced i'm wrong!'

'that's very strange!  i cannot make it out.'

'it's my secret.  but if you will not mock at me, i'll explain it: i
can't do it distinctly; but i'll give you a feeling of how i feel.'

she seated herself by me again: her countenance grew sadder and graver,
and her clasped hands trembled.

'nelly, do you never dream queer dreams?' she said, 
 
 ___________________________
 
suddenly, after some
minutes' reflection.

'yes, now and then,' i answered.

'and so do i.  i've dreamt in my life dreams that have stayed with me
ever after, and changed my ideas: they've gone through and through me,
like wine through water, and altered the colour of my mind.  and this is
one: i'm going to tell it--but take care not to smile at any part of it.'

'oh! don't, miss catherine!' i cried.  'we're dismal enough without
conjuring up ghosts and visions to perplex us.  come, come, be merry and
like yourself!  look at little hareton! _he's_ dreaming nothing dreary.
how sweetly he smiles in his sleep!'

'yes; and how sweetly his father curses in his solitude!  you remember
him, i daresay, when he was just such another as that chubby thing:
nearly as young and innocent.  however, nelly, i shall oblige you to
listen: it's not long; and i've no power to be merry to-night.'

'i
 
 ___________________________
 
 won't hear it, i won't hear it!' i repeated, hastily.

i was superstitious about dreams then, and am still; and catherine had an
unusual gloom in her aspect, that made me dread something from which i
might shape a prophecy, and foresee a fearful catastrophe.  she was
vexed, but she did not proceed.  apparently taking up another subject,
she recommenced in a short time.

'if i were in heaven, nelly, i should be extremely miserable.'

'because you are not fit to go there,' i answered.  'all sinners would be
miserable in heaven.'

'but it is not for that.  i dreamt once that i was there.'

'i tell you i won't hearken
 
 ___________________________
 
 to your dreams, miss catherine!  i'll go to
bed,' i interrupted again.

she laughed, and held me down; for i made a motion to leave my chair.

'this is nothing,' cried she: 'i was only going to say that heaven did
not seem to be my home; and i broke my heart with weeping to come back to
earth; and the angels were so angry that they flung me out into the
middle of the heath on the top of wuthering heights; where i woke sobbing
for joy.  that will do to explain my secret, as well as the other.  i've
no more business to marry e
 
 ___________________________
 
 to marry heathcliff now; so he
shall never know how i love him: and that, not because he's handsome,
nelly, but because he's more myself than i am.  whatever our souls are
made of, his and mine are the same; and linton's is as different as a
moonbeam from lightning, or frost from fire.'

ere this speech ended i became sensible of heathcliff's presence.  having
noticed a slight movement, i turned my head, and saw him rise from the
bench, and steal out noiselessly.  he had listened till he heard
catherine say it would degrade her to marry him, and then he stayed to
hear no further.  my companion, sitting on the ground, was prevented by
the back of the settle from remarking his presence or departure; but i
started, and bade her hush!

'why?' she asked, gazing nervously round.

'joseph is here,' i answered, catching opportunely the roll of his
cartwheels up the road; 'and heathcliff will come in with him.  i'm not
sure whether he were not at the door this moment.'

'oh, he couldn't overhear me at 
 
 ___________________________
 
ortable conscience, and be convinced that
heathcliff has no notion of these things.  he has not, has he?  he does
not know what being in love is!'

'i see no reason that he should not know, as well as you,' i returned;
'and if you are his choice, he'll be the most unfortunate creature that
ever was born!  as soon as you become mrs. linton, he loses friend, and
love, and all!  have you considered how you'll bear the separation, and
how he'll bear to be quite deserted in the world?  because, miss
catherine--'

'he quite deserted! we separated!' she exclaimed, with an accent of
indignation.  'who is to separate us, pray?  they'll meet the fate of
milo!  not as long as i live, ellen: for no mortal creature.  every
linton on the face of the earth might melt into nothing before i could
consent to forsake heathcliff.  oh, that's not what i intend--that's not
what i mean!  i shouldn't be mrs. linton were such a price demanded!
he'll be as much to me as he has been all his lifetime.  edgar must shake
of
 
 ___________________________
 
f his antipathy, and tolerate him, at least.  he will, when he learns
my true feelings towards him.  nelly, i see now you think me a selfish
wretch; but did it never strike you that if heathcliff and i married, we
should be beggars? whereas, if i marry linton i can aid heathcliff to
rise, and place him out of my brother's power.'

'with your husband's money, miss catherine?' i asked.  'you'll find him
not so pliable as you calculate upon: and, though i'm hardly a judge, i
think that's the worst motive you've given yet for being the wife of
young linton.'

'it is not,' retorted she; 'it is the best!  the others were the
satisfaction of my whims: and for edgar's sake, too, to satisfy him.  this
is for the sake of one who comprehends in his person my feelings to edgar
and myself.  i cannot express it; but surely you and everybody have a
notion that there is or shoul
 
 ___________________________
 
i jerked it
forcibly away.  i was out of patience with her folly!

'if i can make any sense of your nonsense, miss,' i said, 'it only goes
to convince me that you are ignorant of the duties you undertake in
marrying; or else that you are a wicked, unprincipled girl.  but trouble
me with no more secrets: i'll not promise to keep them.'

'you'll keep that?' she asked, eagerly.

'no, i'll not promise,' i repeated.

she was about to insist, when the entrance of joseph finished our
conversation; and catherine removed her seat to a corner, and nursed
hareton, while i made the supper.  after it was cooked, my fellow-servant
and i began to quarrel who should carry some to mr. hindley; and we
didn't settle it till all was nearly cold.  then we came to the agreement
that we would let him ask, if he wanted any; for we feared particularly
to go into his presence when he had been some time alone.

'and how isn't that nowt comed in fro' th' field, be this time?  what is
he about? girt idle seeght!' demanded 
 
 ___________________________
 
the old man, looking round for
heathcliff.

'i'll call him,' i replied.  'he's in the barn, i've no doubt.'

i went and called, but got no answer.  on returning, i whispered to
catherine that he had heard a good part of what she said, i was sure; and
told how i saw him quit the kitchen just as she complained of her
brother's conduct regarding him.  she jumped up in a fine fright, flung
hareton on to the settle, and ran to seek for her friend herself; not
taking leisure to consider why she was so flurried, or how her talk would
have affected him.  she was absent such a while that joseph proposed we
should wait no longer.  he cunningly conjectured they were staying away
in order 
 
 ___________________________
 
command that he
must run down the road, and, wherever heathcliff had rambled, find and
make him re-enter directly!

'i want to speak to him, and i _must_, before i go upstairs,' she said.
'and the gate is open: he is somewhere out of hearing; for he would not
reply, though i shouted at the top of the fold as loud as i could.'

joseph objected at first; she was too much in earnest, however, to suffer
contradiction; and at last he placed his hat on his head, and walked
grumbling forth.  meantime, catherine paced up and down the floor,
exclaiming--'i wonder where he is--i wonder where he can be!  what did i
say, nelly?  i've forgotten.  was he vexed at my bad humour this
afternoon?  dear! tell me what i've said to grieve him?  i do wish he'd
come.  i do wish he would!'

'what a noise for nothing!' i cried, though rather uneasy myself.  'what
a trifle scares you!  it's surely no great cause of alarm that heathcliff
should take a moonlight saunter on the moors, or even lie too sulky to
speak to us i
 
 ___________________________
 
 lad gets war und war!' observed he on re-entering.  'he's left th'
gate at t' full swing, and miss's pony has trodden dahn two rigs o' corn,
and plottered through, raight o'er into t' meadow!  hahsomdiver, t'
maister 'ull play t' devil to-morn, and he'll do weel.  he's patience
itsseln wi' sich careless, offald craters--patience itsseln he is!  bud
he'll not be soa allus--yah's see, all on ye!  yah mun'n't drive him out
of his heead for nowt!'

'have you found heathcliff, you ass?' interrupted catherine.  'have you
been looking for him, as i ordered?'

'i sud more likker look for th' horse,' he replied.  'it 'ud be to more
sense.  bud i can look for norther horse nur man of a neeght loike
this--as black as t' chimbley! und heathcliff's noan t' chap to coom at
_my_ whistle--happen he'll be less hard o' hearing wi' _ye_!'

it _was_ a very dark evening for summer: the clouds appeared inclined to
thunder, and i said we had better all sit down; the approaching rain
would be certain to bring him hom
 
 ___________________________
 
e without further trouble.  however,
catherine would not be persuaded into tranquillity.  she kept wandering
to and fro, from the gate to the door, in a state of agitation which
permitted no repose; and at length took up a permanent situation on one
side of the wall, near the road: where, heedless of my expostulations and
the growling thunder, and the great drops that began to plash around her,
she remained, calling at intervals, and then listening, and then crying
outright.  she beat hareton, or any child, at a good passionate fit of
cryin
 
 ___________________________
 
us to chapters and verses where we might find
them.

i, having vainly begged the wilful girl to rise and remove her wet
things, left him preaching and her shivering, and betook myself to bed
with little hareton, who slept as fast as if everyone had been sleeping
round him.  i heard joseph read on a while afterwards; then i
distinguished his slow step on the ladder, and then i dropped asleep.

coming down somewhat later than usual, i saw, by the sunbeams piercing
the chinks of the shutters, miss catherine still seated near the
fireplace.  the house-door was ajar, too; light entered from its unclosed
windows; hindley had come out, and stood on the kitchen hearth, haggard
and drowsy.

'what ails you, cathy?' he was saying when i entered: 'you look as dismal
as a drowned whelp.  why are you so damp and pale, child?'

'i've been wet,' she answered reluctantly, 'and i'm cold, that's all.'

'oh, she is naughty!' i cried, perceiving the master to be tolerably
sober.  'she got steeped in the shower of y
 
 ___________________________
 
d i couldn't prevail on her to stir.'

mr. earnshaw stared at us in surprise.  'the night through,' he repeated.
'what kept her up? not fear of the thunder, surely?  that was over hours
since.'

neither of us wished to mention heathcliff's absence, as long as we could
conceal it; so i replied, i didn't know how she took it into her head to
sit up; and she said nothing.  the morning was fresh and cool; i threw
back the lattice, and presently the room filled with sweet scents from
the garden; but catherine called peevishly to me, 'ellen, shut the
window.  i'm starving!'  and her teeth chattered as she shrank closer to
the almost extinguished embers.

'she's ill,' said hindley, taking her wrist; 'i suppose that's the reason
she would not go to bed.  damn it!  i don't want to be troubled with more
sickness here.  what took you into the rain?'

'running after t' lads, as usuald!' croaked joseph, catching an
opportunity from our hesitation to thrust in his evil tongue.  'if i war
yah, maister, i'd ju
 
 ___________________________
 
d, then, wer grand lady goes a-courting of her side!  it's bonny
behaviour, lurking amang t' fields, after twelve o' t' night, wi' that
fahl, flaysome divil of a gipsy, heathcliff!  they think _i'm_ blind; but
i'm noan: nowt ut t' soart!--i seed young linton boath coming and going,
and i seed _yah_' (directing his discourse to me), 'yah gooid fur nowt,
slattenly witch! nip up and bolt into th' house, t' minute yah heard t'
maister's horse-fit clatter up t' road.'

'silence, eavesdropper!' cried catherine; 'none of your insolence before
me!  edgar linton came yesterday by chance, hindley; and it was _i_ who
told him to be off: because i knew you would not like to have met him as
you were.'

'you lie, cathy, no doubt,' answered her brother, 'and you are a
confounded simpleton!  but never mind linton at present: tell me, were
you not with heathcliff last night?  speak the truth, now.  you need not
be afraid of harming him: though i hate him as much as ever, he did me a
good turn a short time since
 
 ___________________________
 
 that will make my conscience tender of
breaking his neck.  to prevent it, i shall send him about his business
this very morning; and after he's gone, i'd advise you all to look sharp:
i shall only have the more humour for you.'

'i never saw heathcliff last night,' answered catherine, beginning to sob
bitterly: 'and if you do turn him out of doors, i'll go with him.  but,
perhaps, you'll never have an opportunity: perhaps, he's gone.'  here she
burst into uncontrollable grief, and the remainder of her words were
inarticulate.

hindley lavished on her a torrent of scornful abuse, and bade her get to
her room immediately, or she shouldn't cry for nothing!  i obliged her to
obey; and i shall never forget what a scene she acted when we reached her
chamber: it terrified me.  i t
 
 ___________________________
 
d not throw herself downstairs or out of
the window; and then he left: for he had enough to do in the parish,
where two or three miles was the ordinary distance between cottage and
cottage.

though i cannot say i made a gentle nurse, and joseph and the master were
no better, and though our patient was as wearisome and headstrong as a
patient could be, she weathered it through.  old mrs. linton paid us
several visits, to be sure, and set things to rights, and scolded and
ordered us all; and when catherine was convalescent, she insisted on
conveying her to thrushcross grange: for which deliverance we were very
grateful.  but the poor dame had reason to repent of her kindness: she
and her husband both took the fever, and died within a few days of each
other.

our young lady returned to us saucier and more passionate, and haughtier
than ever.  heathcliff had never been heard of since the evening of the
thunder-storm; and, one day, i had the misfortune, when she had provoked
me exceedingly, to lay t
 
 ___________________________
 
 him alone she
might trample on us like slaves, for aught he cared!  edgar linton, as
multitudes have been before and will be after him, was infatuated: and
believed himself the happiest man alive on the day he led her to
gimmerton chapel, three years subsequent to his father's death.

much against my inclination, i was persuaded to leave wuthering heights
and accompany her here. little hareton was nearly five years old, and i
had just begun to teach him his letters.  we made a sad parting; but
catherine's tears were more powerful than ours.  when i refused to go,
and when she found her entreaties did not move me, she went lamenting to
her husband and brother.  the former offered me munificent wages; the
latter ordered me to pack up: he wanted no women in the house, he said,
now that there was no mistress; and as to hareton, the curate should take
him in hand, by-and-by.  and so i had but one choice left: to do as i was
ordered.  i told the master he got rid of all decent people only to run
to 
 
 ___________________________
 
 promptly on
the english highways?'

'he may have done a little in all these vocations, mr. lockwood; but i
couldn't give my word for any.  i stated before that i didn't know how he
gained his money; neither am i aware of the means he took to raise his
mind from the savage ignorance into which it was sunk: but, with your
leave, i'll proceed in my own fashion, if you think it will amuse and not
weary you.  are you feeling better this morning?'

'much.'

'that's good news.'

* * * * *

i got miss catherine and myself to thrushcross grange; and, to my
agreeable disappointment, she behaved infinitely better than i dared to
expect.  she seemed almost over-fond of mr. linton; and even to his
sister she showed plenty of affection.  they were both very attentive to
her comfort, certainly.  it was not the thorn bending to the
honeysuckles, but the honeysuckles embracing the thorn.  there were no
mutual concessions: one stood erect, and the others yielded: and who can
be ill-natured and bad-tempered when
 
 ___________________________
 
saw any other servant grow cloudy at some imperious
order of hers, he would show his trouble by a frown of displeasure that
never darkened on his own account.  he many a time spoke sternly to me
about my pertness; and averred that the stab of a knife could not inflict
a worse pang than he suffered at seeing his lady vexed.  not to grieve a
kind master, i learned to be less touchy; and, for the space of half a
year, the gunpowder lay as harmless as sand, because no fire came near to
explode it.  catherine had seasons of gloom and silence now and then:
they were respected with sympathising silence by her husband, who
ascribed them to an alteration in her constitution, produced by her
perilous illness; as she was never subject to depression of spirits
before.  the return of sunshine was welcomed by answering sunshine from
him.  i believe i may assert that they were really in possession of deep
and growing happiness.

it ended.  well, we _must_ be for ourselves in the long run; the mild and
generou
 
 ___________________________
 
a person from gimmerton wishes to see you ma'am.'

'what does he want?' asked mrs. linton.

'i did not question him,' i answered.

'well, close the curtains, nelly,' she said; 'and bring up tea.  i'll be
back again directly.'

she quitted the apartment; mr. edgar inquired, carelessly, who it was.

'some one mistress does not expect,' i replied.  'that heathcliff--you
recollect him, sir--who used to live at mr. earnshaw's.'

'what! the gipsy--the ploughboy?' he cried.  'why did you not say so to
catherine?'

'hush! you must not call him by those names, master,' i said.  'she'd be
sadly grieved to hear you.  she was nearly heartbroken when he ran off.  i
guess his return will make a jubilee to her.'

mr. linton walked to a window on the other side of the room that
overlooked the court.  he unfastened it, and leant out.  i suppose they
were below, for he exclaimed quickly: 'don't stand there, love!  bring
the person in, if it be anyone particular.'  ere long, i heard the click
of the latch, and ca
 
 ___________________________
 
'no,' she added, after a while; 'i cannot sit in the kitchen.  set two
tables here, ellen: one for your master and miss isabella, being gentry;
the other for heathcliff and myself, being of the lower orders.  will
that please you, dear?  or must i have a fire lighted elsewhere?  if so,
give directions.  i'll run down and secure my guest.  i'm afraid the joy
is too great to be real!'

she was about to dart off again; but edgar arrested her.

'_you_ bid him step up,' he said, addressing me; 'and, catherine, try to
be glad, without being absurd.  the whole household need not witness the
sight of your welcoming a runaway servant as a brother.'

i descended, and found heathcliff waiting under the porch, evidently
anticipating an invitation to enter.  he followed my guidance without
waste of words, and i ushered him into the presence of the master and
mistress, whose flushed cheeks betrayed signs of warm talking.  but the
lady's glowed with another feeling when her friend appeared at the door:
she sp
 
 ___________________________
 
ute at a loss how to address the ploughboy, as he had called him.
heathcliff dropped his slight hand, and stood looking at him coolly till
he chose to speak.

'sit down, sir,' he said, at length.  'mrs. linton, recalling old times,
would have me give you a cordial reception; and, of course, i am
gratified when anything occurs to please her.'

'and i also,' answered heathcliff, 'especially if it be anything in which
i have a part.  i shall stay an hour or two willingly.'

he took a seat opposite catherine, who kept her gaze fixed on him as if
she feared he would vanish were she to remove it.  he did not raise his
to her often: a quick glance now and then sufficed; but it flashed back,
each time more confidently, the undisguised delight he drank from hers.
they were too much absorbed in their mutual joy to suffer embarrassment.
not so mr. edgar: he grew pale with pure annoyance: a feeling that
reached its climax when his lady rose, and stepping across the rug,
seized heathcliff's hands again, and
 
 ___________________________
 
mpse of your face, a
stare of surprise, perhaps, and pretended pleasure; afterwards settle my
score with hindley; and then prevent the law by doing execution on
myself.  your welcome has put these ideas out of my mind; but beware of
meeting me with another aspect next time!  nay, you'll not drive me off
again.  you were really sorry for me, were you?  well, there was cause.
i've fought through a bitter life since i last heard your voice; and you
must forgive me, for i struggled only for you!'

'catherine, unless we are to have cold tea, please to come to the table,'
interrupted linton, striving to preserve his ordinary tone, and a due
measure of politeness.  'mr. heathcliff will have a long walk, wherever
he may lodge to-night; and i'm thirsty.'

she took her post before the urn; and miss isabella came, summoned by the
bell; then, having handed their chairs forward, i left the room.  the
meal hardly endured ten minutes.  catherine's cup was never filled: she
could neither eat nor drink.  edgar 
 
 ___________________________
 
'll take no revenge on his folly; i can afford to suffer anything
hereafter!  should the meanest thing alive slap me on the cheek, i'd not
only turn the other, but i'd ask pardon for provoking it; and, as a
proof, i'll go make my peace with edgar instantly.  good-night!  i'm an
angel!'

in this self-complacent conviction she departed; and the success of her
fulfilled resolution was obvious on the morrow: mr. linton had not only
abjured his peevishness (though his spirits seemed still subdued by
catherine's exuberance of vivacity), but he ventured no objection to her
taking isabella with her to wuthering heights in the afternoon; and she
rewarded him with such a summer of sweetness and affection in return as
made the house a paradise for several days; both master and servants
profiting from the perpetual sunshine.

heathcliff--mr. heathcliff i should say in future--used the liberty of
visiting at thrushcross grange cautiously, at first: he seemed estimating
how far its owner would bear his intru
 
 ___________________________
 
sion.  catherine, also, deemed it
judicious to moderate her expressions of pleasure in receiving him; and
he gradually established his right to be expected.  he retained a great
deal of the reserve for which his boyhood was remarkable; and that served
to repress all startling demonstrations of feeling.  my master's
uneasiness experienced a lull, and further circumstances diverted it into
another channel for a space.

his new source of trouble sprang from the not anticipated misfortune of
isabella linton evincin
 
 ___________________________
 
ind: it revolted him: he shrank forebodingly from the idea
of committing isabella to its keeping.  he would have recoiled still more
had he been aware that her attachment rose unsolicited, and was bestowed
where it awakened no reciprocation of sentiment; for the minute he
discovered its existence he laid the blame on heathcliff's deliberate
designing.

we had all remarked, during some time, that miss linton fretted and pined
over something.  she grew cross and wearisome; snapping at and teasing
catherine continually, at the imminent risk of exhausting her limited
patience.  we excused her, to a certain extent, on the plea of
ill-health: she was dwindling and fading before our eyes.  but one day,
when she had been peculiarly wayward, rejecting her breakfast,
complaining that the servants did not do what she told them; that the
mistress would allow her to be nothing in the house, and edgar neglected
her; that she had caught a cold with the doors being left open, and we
let the parlour fire go out
 
 ___________________________
 
 on purpose to vex her, with a hundred yet
more frivolous accusations, mrs. linton peremptorily insisted that she
should get to bed; and, having scolded her heartily, threatened to send
for the doctor.  mention of kenneth caused her to exclaim, instantly,
that her health was perfect, and it was only catherine's harshness which
made her unhappy.

'how can you say i am harsh, you naughty fondling?' cried the mistress,
amazed at the unreasonable assertion.  'you are surely losing your
reason.  when have i been harsh, tell me?'

'yesterday,' sobbed isabella, 'and now!'

'yesterday!' said her sister-in-law.  'on what occasion?'

'in our walk along the moor: you told me to ramble where i pleased, while
you sauntered on with mr. heathcliff!'

'and that's your notion of harshness?' said catherine, laughing.
 
 ___________________________
 
company was superfluous?  we didn't care whether you
kept with us or not; i merely thought heathcliff's talk would have
nothing entertaining for your ears.'

'oh, no,' wept the young lady; 'you wished me away, because you knew i
liked to be there!'

'is she sane?' asked mrs. linton, appealing to me.  'i'll repeat our
conversation, word for word, isabella; and you point out any charm it
could have had for you.'

'i don't mind the conversation,' she answered: 'i wanted to be with--'

'well?' said catherine, perceiving her hesitate to complete the sentence.

'with him: and i won't be always sent off!' she continued, kindling up.
'you are a dog in the manger, cathy, and desire no one to be loved but
yourself!'

'you are an impertinent little monkey!' exclaimed mrs. linton, in
surprise.  'but i'll not believe this idiotcy!  it is impossible that you
can covet the admiration of heathcliff--that you consider him an
agreeable person!  i hope i have misunderstood you, isabella?'

'no, you have not,' sai
 
 ___________________________
 
d the infatuated girl.  'i love him more than ever
you loved edgar, and he might love me, if you would let him!'

'i wouldn't be you for a kingdom, then!' catherine declared,
emphatically: and she seemed to speak sincerely.  'nelly, help me to
convince her of her madness.  tell her what heathcliff is: an unreclaimed
creature, without refinement, without cultivation; an arid wilderness of
furze and whinstone.  i'd as soon put that little canary into the park on
a winter's day, as recommend you to bestow your heart on him!  it is
deplorable ignorance of his character, child, and nothing else, which
makes that dream enter your head.  pray, don't imagine that 
 
 ___________________________
 
 linton; and yet he'd be quite capable of
marrying your fortune and expectations: avarice is growing with him a
besetting sin.  there's my picture: and i'm his friend--so much so, that
had he thought seriously to catch you, i should, perhaps, have held my
tongue, and let you fall into his trap.'

miss linton regarded her sister-in-law with indignation.

'for shame! for shame!' she repeated, angrily.  'you are worse than
twenty foes, you poisonous friend!'

'ah! you won't believe me, then?' said catherine.  'you think i speak
from wicked selfishness?'

'i'm certain you do,' retorted isabella; 'and i shudder at you!'

'good!' cried the other.  'try for yourself, if that be your spirit: i
have done, and yield the argument to your saucy insolence.'--

'and i must suffer for her egotism!' she sobbed, as mrs. linton left the
room.  'all, all is against me: she has blighted my single consolation.
but she uttered falsehoods, didn't she?  mr. heathcliff is not a fiend:
he has an honourable soul, and a t
 
 ___________________________
 
 as well 's onybody at a
raight divil's jest.  does he niver say nowt of his fine living amang us,
when he goes to t' grange?  this is t' way on 't:--up at sun-down: dice,
brandy, cloised shutters, und can'le-light till next day at noon: then,
t'fooil gangs banning und raving to his cham'er, makking dacent fowks dig
thur fingers i' thur lugs fur varry shame; un' the knave, why he can
caint his brass, un' ate, un' sleep, un' off to his neighbour's to gossip
wi' t' wife.  i' course, he tells dame catherine how her fathur's goold
runs into his pocket, and her fathur's son gallops down t' broad road,
while he flees afore to oppen t' pikes!"  now, miss linton, joseph is an
old rascal, but no liar; and, if his account of heathcliff's conduct be
true, you would never think of desiring such a husband, would you?'

'you are leagued with the rest, ellen!' she replied.  'i'll not listen to
your slanders.  what malevolence you must have to wish to convince me
that there is no happiness in the world!'

whet
 
 ___________________________
 
her she would have got over this fancy if left to herself, or
persevered in nursing it perpetually, i cannot say: she had little time
to reflect.  the day after, there was a justice-meeting at the next town;
my master was obliged to attend; and mr. heathcliff, aware of his
absence, called rather earlier than usual.  catherine and isabella were
sitting in the library, on hostile terms, but silent: the latter alarmed
at her recent indiscretion, and the disclosure she had made of her secret
feelings in a transient fit of passion; the former, on mature
consideration, really offended with her companion; and, if she laughed
again at her pertness, inclined to make it no laughing matter to her.  she
did laugh as she saw heathcliff pass the window.  i was sweeping the
hearth, and i noticed a mischievous smile on her lips.  i
 
 ___________________________
 
!  no, no, isabella, you sha'n't run off,'
she continued, arresting, with feigned playfulness, the confounded girl,
who had risen indignantly.  'we were quarrelling like cats about you,
heathcliff; and i was fairly beaten in protestations of devotion and
admiration: and, moreover, i was informed that if i would but have the
manners to stand aside, my rival, as she will have herself to be, would
shoot a shaft into your soul that would fix you for ever, and send my
image into eternal oblivion!'

'catherine!' said isabella, calling up her dignity, and disdaining to
struggle from the tight grasp that held her, 'i'd thank you to adhere to
the truth and not slander me, even in joke!  mr. heathcliff, be kind
enough to bid this friend of yours release me: she forgets that you and i
are not intimate acquaintances; and what amuses her is painful to me
beyond expression.'

as the guest answered nothing, but took his seat, and looked thoroughly
indifferent what sentiments she cherished concerning him, she 
 
 ___________________________
 
said heathcliff, twisting his chair to face
them.  'she wishes to be out of my society now, at any rate!'

and he stared hard at the object of discourse, as one might do at a
strange repulsive animal: a centipede from the indies, for instance,
which curiosity leads one to examine in spite of the aversion it raises.
the poor thing couldn't bear that; she grew white and red in rapid
succession, and, while tears beaded her lashes, bent the strength of her
small fingers to loosen the firm clutch of catherine; and perceiving that
as fast as she raised one finger off her arm another closed down, and she
could not remove the whole together, she began to make use of her nails;
and their sharpness presently ornamented the detainer's with crescents of
red.

'there's a tigress!' exclaimed mrs. linton, setting her free, and shaking
her hand with pain.  'begone, for god's sake, and hide your vixen face!
how foolish to reveal those talons to him.  can't you fancy the
conclusions he'll draw?  look, heathcliff
 
 ___________________________
 
ice it
further: i wished to punish her sauciness, that's all.  i like her too
well, my dear heathcliff, to let you absolutely seize and devour her up.'

'and i like her too ill to attempt it,' said he, 'except in a very
ghoulish fashion.  you'd hear of odd things if i lived alone with that
mawkish, waxen face: the most ordinary would be painting on its white the
colours of the rainbow, and turning the blue eyes black, every day or
two: they detestably resemble linton's.'

'delectably!' observed catherine.  'they are dove's eyes--angel's!'

'she's her brother's heir, is she not?' he asked, after a brief silence.

'i should be sorry to think so,' returned his companion.  'half a dozen
nephews shall erase her title, please heaven!  abstract your mind from
the subject at present: you are too prone to covet your neighbour's
goods; remember _this_ neighbour's goods are mine.'

'if they were _mine_, they would be none the less that,' said heathcliff;
'but though isabella linton may be silly, she is sc
 
 ___________________________
 
arcely mad; and, in
short, we'll dismiss the matter, as you advise.'

from their tongues they did dismiss it; and catherine, probably, from her
thoughts.  the other, i felt certain, recalled it often in the course of
the evening.  i saw him smile to himself--grin rather--and lapse into
ominous musing whenever mrs. linton had occasion to be absent from the
apartment.

i determined to watch his movements.  my heart invariably cleaved to the
master's, in preference to catherine's side: with reason i imagined, for
he was kind, and trustful, and honourable; and she--she could not be
called _opposite_, yet she seemed to allow herself such wide latitude,
that i had little faith in her principles, and still less sympathy for
her feelings.  i wanted something to happen which might have the effect
of freeing both wuthering heights and the grange of mr. heathcliff
quietly; leaving us as we had been prior to his advent.  his visits were
a continual nightmare to me; and, i susp
 
 ___________________________
 
ight.  he then stepped across the pavement to her, and said something:
she seemed embarrassed, and desirous of getting away; to prevent it, he
laid his hand on her arm.  she averted her face: he apparently put some
question which she had no mind to answer.  there was another rapid glance
at the house, and supposing himself unseen, the scoundrel had the
impudence to embrace her.

'judas!  traitor!' i ejaculated.  'you are a hypocrite, too, are you?  a
deliberate deceiver.'

'who is, nelly?' said catherine's voice at my elbow: i had been
over-intent on watching the pair outside to mark her entrance.

'your worthless friend!' i answered, warmly: 'the sneaking rascal yonder.
ah, he has caught a glimpse of us--he is coming in!  i wonder will he
have the heart to find a plausible excuse for making love to miss, when
he told you he hated her?'

mrs. linton saw isabella tear herself free, and run into the garden; and
a minute after, heathcliff opened the door.  i couldn't withhold giving
some loose to 
 
 ___________________________
 
my indignation; but catherine angrily insisted on silence,
and threatened to order me out of the kitchen, if i dared to be so
presumptuous as to put in my insolent tongue.

'to hear you, people might think you were the mistress!' she cried.  'you
want setting down in your right place!  heathcliff, what are you about,
raising this stir?  i said you must let isabella alone!--i beg you will,
unless you are tired of being received here, and wish linton to draw the
bolts against you!'

'god forbid that he should try!' answered t
 
 ___________________________
 
he black villain.  i detested
him just then.  'god keep him meek and patient!  every day i grow madder
after sending him to heaven!'

'hush!' said catherine, shutting the inner door!  'don't vex me.  why
have you disregarded my request?  did she come across you on purpose?'

'what is it to you?' he growled.  'i have a right to kiss her, if she
chooses; and you have no right to object.  i am not _your_ husband: _you_
needn't be jealous of me!'

'i'm not jealous of you,' replied the mistress; 'i'm jealous for you.
clear your face: you sha'n't scowl at me!  if you like isabella, you
shall marry her.  but do you like her?  tell the truth, heathcliff!
t
 
 ___________________________
 
here, you won't answer.  i'm certain you don't.'

'and would mr. linton approve of his sister marrying that man?' i
inquired.

'mr. linton should approve,' returned my lady, decisively.

'he might spare himself the trouble,' said heathcliff: 'i could do as
well without his approbation. and as to you, catherine, i have a mind to
speak a few words now, while we are at it. i want you to be aware that i
_know_ you have treated me infernally--infernally! do you hear? and if
you flatter yourself that i don't perceive it, you are a fool; and if
you think i can be consoled by sweet words, you are an idiot: and if you
fancy i'll suffer unrevenged, i'll convince you of the contrary, in a
very little while! meantime, thank you for telling me your
sister-in-law's secret: i swear i'll make the most of it. and sta
 
 ___________________________
 
nds down his slaves and they don't turn
against him; they crush those beneath them.  you are welcome to torture
me to death for your amusement, only allow me to amuse myself a little in
the same style, and refrain from insult as much as you are able.  having
levelled my palace, don't erect a hovel and complacently admire your own
charity in giving me that for a home.  if i imagined you really wished me
to marry isabel, i'd cut my throat!'

'oh, the evil is that i am _not_ jealous, is it?' cried catherine.  'well,
i won't repeat my offer of a wife: it is as bad as offering satan a lost
soul.  your bliss lies, like his, in inflicting misery.  you prove it.
edgar is restored from the ill-temper he gave way to at your coming; i
begin to be secure and tranquil; and you, restless to know us at peace,
appear resolved on exciting a quarrel.  quarrel with edgar, if you
please, heathcliff, and deceive his sister: you'll hit on exactly the
most efficient method of revenging yourself on me.'

the conversat
 
 ___________________________
 
ion ceased.  mrs. linton sat down by the fire, flushed and
gloomy.  the spirit which served her was growing intractable: she could
neither lay nor control it.  he stood on the hearth with folded arms,
brooding on his evil thoughts; and in this position i left them to seek
the master, who was wondering what kept catherine below so long.

'ellen,' said he, when i entered, 'have you seen your mistress?'

'yes; she's in the kitchen, sir,' i answered.  'she's sadly put out by
mr. heathcliff's behaviour: and, indeed, i do think it's time to arrange
his visits on another footing.  there's harm in being too soft, and now
it's come to this--.'  and i related the scene in the court, and, as near
as i dared, the whole subsequent dispute.  i fancied it could not be very
prejudicial to mrs. linton; unless she made it so aft
 
 ___________________________
 
erwards, by assuming
the defensive for her guest.  edgar linton had difficulty in hearing me
to the close.  his first words revealed that he did not clear his wife of
blame.

'this is insufferable!' he exclaimed.  'it is disgraceful that she should
own him for a friend, and force his company on me!  call me two men out
of the hall, ellen.  catherine shall linger no longer to argue with the
low ruffian--i have humoured her enough.'

he descended, and bidding the servants wait in the passage, went,
followed by me, to the kitchen.  its occupants had recommenced their
angry discussion: mrs. linton, at least, was scolding with renewed
vigour; heathcliff had moved to the window, and hung his head, somewhat
cowed by her violent rating apparently.  he saw the master first, and
made a hasty motion that she should be silent; which she obeyed,
abrupt
 
 ___________________________
 
husband, implying both
carelessness and contempt of his irritation.  heathcliff, who had raised
his eyes at the former speech, gave a sneering laugh at the latter; on
purpose, it seemed, to draw mr. linton's attention to him.  he succeeded;
but edgar did not mean to entertain him with any high flights of passion.

'i've been so far forbearing with you, sir,' he said quietly; 'not that i
was ignorant of your miserable, degraded character, but i felt you were
only partly responsible for that; and catherine wishing to keep up your
acquaintance, i acquiesced--foolishly.  your presence is a moral poison
that would contaminate the most virtuous: for that cause, and to prevent
worse consequences, i shall deny you hereafter admission into this house,
and give notice now that i require your instant departure.  three
minutes' delay will render it involuntary and ignominious.

heathcliff measured the height and breadth of the speaker with an eye
full of derision.

'cathy, this lamb of yours threatens like
 
 ___________________________
 
 you possess.  no, i'll swallow the key before you shall get it!  i'm
delightfully rewarded for my kindness to each!  after constant indulgence
of one's weak nature, and the other's bad one, i earn for thanks two
samples of blind ingratitude, stupid to absurdity!  edgar, i was
defending you and yours; and i wish heathcliff may flog you sick, for
daring to think an evil thought of me!'

it did not need the medium of a flogging to produce that effect on the
master.  he tried to wrest the key from catherine's grasp, and for safety
she flung it into the hottest part of the fire; whereupon mr. edgar was
taken with a nervous trembling, and his countenance grew deadly pale.  for
his life he could not avert that excess of emotion: mingled anguish and
humiliation overcame him completely.  he leant on the back of a chair,
and covered his face.

'oh, heavens!  in old days this would win you knighthood!' exclaimed mrs.
linton.  'we are vanquished! we are vanquished!  heathcliff would as soon
lift a finger 
 
 ___________________________
 
ence considerable satisfaction.  is he
weeping, or is he going to faint for fear?'

the fellow approached and gave the chair on which linton rested a push.
he'd better have kept his distance: my master quickly sprang erect, and
struck him full on the throat a blow that would have levelled a slighter
man.  it took his breath for a minute; and while he choked, mr. linton
walked out by the back door into the yard, and from thence to the front
entrance.

'there! you've done with coming here,' cried catherine.  'get away, now;
he'll return with a brace of pistols and half-a-dozen assistants.  if he
did overhear us, of course he'd never forgive you.  you've played me an
ill turn, heathcliff!  but go--make haste!  i'd rather see edgar at bay
than you.'

'do you suppose i'm going with that blow burning in my gullet?' he
thundered.  'by hell, no!  i'll crush his ribs in like a rotten hazel-nut
before i cross the threshold!  if i don't floor him now, i shall murder
him some time; so, as you value his exi
 
 ___________________________
 
 her fits of passion to
account, beforehand, might, by exerting her will, manage to control
herself tolerably, even while under their influence; and i did not wish
to 'frighten' her husband, as she said, and multiply his annoyances for
the purpose of serving her selfishness.  therefore i said nothing when i
met the master coming towards the parlour; but i took the liberty of
turning back to listen whether they would resume their quarrel together.
he began to speak first.

'remain where you are, catherine,' he said; without any anger in his
voice, but with much sorrowful despondency.  'i shall not stay.  i am
neither come to wrangle nor be reconciled; but i wish just to learn
whether, after this evening's events, you intend to continue your
intimacy with--'

'oh, for mercy's sake,' interrupted the mistress, stamping her foot, 'for
mercy's sake, let us hear no more of it now!  your cold blood cannot be
worked into a fever: your veins are full of ice-water; but mine are
boiling, and the sight of s
 
 ___________________________
 
uch chillness makes them dance.'

'to get rid of me, answer my question,' persevered mr. linton.  'you must
answer it; and that violence does not alarm me.  i have found that you
can be as stoical as anyone, when you please.  will you give up
heathcliff hereafter, or will you give up me?  it is impossible for you
to be _my_ friend and _his_ at the same time; and i absolutely _require_
to know which you choose.'

'i require to be let alone!' exclaimed catherine, furiously.  'i demand
it!  don't you see i can scarcely stand?  edgar, you--you leave me!'

she rang the bell till it broke with a twang; i entered leisurely.  it
was enough to try the temper of a saint, such senseless, wicked rages!
there she lay dashing her head against the arm of the sofa, and grinding
her teeth, so that you might fancy she would crash them to splinters!  mr.
linton stood looking at her in sudden compunction and fear.  he told me
to fetch some water.  she had no breath for 
 
 ___________________________
 
nothing of her evasive replies,
and was obliged to close the examination unsatisfactorily; adding,
however, a solemn warning, that if she were so insane as to encourage
that worthless suitor, it would dissolve all bonds of relationship
between herself and him.




chapter xii


while miss linton moped about the park and garden, always silent, and
almost always in tears; and her brother shut himself up among books that
he never opened--wearying, i guessed, with a continual vague expectation
that catherine, repenting her conduct, would come of her own accord to
ask pardon, and seek a reconciliation--and _she_ fasted pertinaciously,
under the idea, probably, that at every meal edgar was ready to choke for
her absence, and pride alone held him from running to cast himself at her
feet; i went about my household duties, convinced that the grange had but
one sensible soul in its walls, and that lodged in my body.  i wasted no
condolences on miss, nor any expostulations on my mistress; nor did i pay
mu
 
 ___________________________
 

think, though his studies occupy him rather more than they ought: he is
continually among his books, since he has no other society.'

i should not have spoken so if i had known her true condition, but i
could not get rid of the notion that she acted a part of her disorder.

'among his books!' she cried, confounded.  'and i dying!  i on the brink
of the grave!  my god! does he know how i'm altered?' continued she,
staring at her reflection in a mirror hanging against the opposite wall.
'is that catherine linton?  he imagines me in a pet--in play, perhaps.
cannot you inform him that it is frightful earnest?  nelly, if it be not
too late, as soon as i learn how he feels, i'll choose between these two:
either to starve at once--that would be no punishment unless he had a
heart--or to recover, and leave the country.  are you speaking the truth
about him now?  take care.  is he actually so utterly indifferent for my
life?'

'why, ma'am,' i answered, 'the master has no idea of your being deranged;
an
 
 ___________________________
 
ese three awful nights i've never closed my lids--and
oh, i've been tormented!  i've been haunted, nelly!  but i begin to fancy
you don't like me.  how strange!  i thought, though everybody hated and
despised each other, they could not avoid loving me.  and they have all
turned to enemies in a few hours: they have, i'm positive; the people
here.  how dreary to meet death, surrounded by their cold faces!
isabella, terrified and repelled, afraid to enter the room, it would be
so dreadful to watch catherine go.  and edgar standing solemnly by to see
it over; then offering prayers of thanks to god for restoring peace to
his house, and going back to his _books_!  what in the name of all that
feels has he to do with _books_, when i am dying?'

she could not bear the notion which i had put into her head of mr.
linton's philosophical resignation.  tossing about, she increased her
feverish bewilderment to madness, and tore the pillow with her teeth;
then raising herself up all burning, desired that i wo
 
 ___________________________
 
ll prevent your trying starving again.'

'oh, if i were but in my own bed in the old house!' she went on bitterly,
wringing her hands.  'and that wind sounding in the firs by the lattice.
do let me feel it--it comes straight down the moor--do let me have one
breath!'  to pacify her i held the casement ajar a few seconds.  a cold
blast rushed through; i closed it, and returned to my post.  she lay
still now, her face bathed in tears.  exhaustion of body had entirely
subdued her spirit: our fiery catherine was no better than a wailing
child.

'how long is it since i shut myself in here?' she asked, suddenly
reviving.

'it was monday evening,' i replied, 'and this is thursday night, or
rather friday morning, at present.'

'what! of the same week?' she exclaimed.  'only that brief time?'

'long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill-temper,' observed
i.

'well, it seems a weary number of hours,' she muttered doubtfully: 'it
must be more. i remember being in the parlour after they had quar
 
 ___________________________
 
en come from the library; and, in passing through
the lobby, had noticed our talking and been attracted by curiosity, or
fear, to examine what it signified, at that late hour.

'oh, sir!' i cried, checking the exclamation risen to his lips at the
sight which met him, and the bleak atmosphere of the chamber.  'my poor
mistress is ill, and she quite masters me: i cannot manage her at all;
pray, come and persuade her to go to bed.  forget your anger, for she's
hard to guide any way but her own.'

'catherine ill?' he said, hastening to us.  'shut the window, ellen!
catherine! why--'

he was silent.  the haggardness of mrs. linton's appearance smote him
speechless, and he could only glance from her to me in horrified
astonishment.

'she's been fretting here,' i continued, 'and eating scarcely anything,
and never complaining: she would admit none of us till this evening, and
so we couldn't inform you of her state, as we were not aware of it
ourselves; but it is nothing.'

i felt i uttered my explanat
 
 ___________________________
 
r linton?' she said, with angry
animation.  'you are one of those things that are ever found when least
wanted, and when you are wanted, never!  i suppose we shall have plenty
of lamentations now--i see we shall--but they can't keep me from my
narrow home out yonder: my resting-place, where i'm bound before spring
is over!  there it is: not among the lintons, mind, under the
chapel-roof, but in the open air, with a head-stone; and you may please
yourself whether you go to them or come to me!'

'catherine, what have you done?' commenced the master.  'am i nothing to
you any more?  do you love that wretch heath--'

'hush!' cried mrs. linton.  'hush, this moment!  you mention that name
and i end the matter instantly by a spring from the window!  what you
touch at present you may have; but my soul will be on that hill-top
before you lay hands on me again.  i don't want you, edgar: i'm past
wanting you.  return to your books.  i'm glad you possess a consolation,
for all you had in me is gone.'

'her
 
 ___________________________
 
ng you,
and i have got a faithful servant's wages!  well, it will teach me to be
careful next time.  next time you may gather intelligence for yourself!'

'the next time you bring a tale to me you shall quit my service, ellen
dean,' he replied.

'you'd rather hear nothing about it, i suppose, then, mr. linton?' said
i.  'heathcliff has your permission to come a-courting to miss, and to
drop in at every opportunity your absence offers, on purpose to poison
the mistress against you?'

confused as catherine was, her wits were alert at applying our
conversation.

'ah!  nelly has played traitor,' she exclaimed, passionately.  'nelly is
my hidden enemy.  you witch!  so you do seek elf-bolts to hurt us!  let
me go, and i'll make her rue!  i'll make her howl a recantation!'

a maniac's fury kindled under her brows; she struggled desperately to
disengage herself from linton's arms.  i felt no inclination to tarry the
event; and, resolving to seek medical aid on my own responsibility, i
quitted the chamb
 
 ___________________________
 
nd what
mischievous person had treated it so.  while untying the knot round the
hook, it seemed to me that i repeatedly caught the beat of horses' feet
galloping at some distance; but there were such a number of things to
occupy my reflections that i hardly gave the circumstance a thought:
though it was a strange sound, in that place, at two o'clock in the
morning.

mr. kenneth was fortunately just issuing from his house to see a patient
in the village as i came up the street; and my account of catherine
linton's malady induced him to accompany me back immediately.  he was a
plain rough man; and he made no scruple to speak his doubts of her
surviving this second attack; unless she were more submissive to his
directions than she had shown herself before.

'nelly dean,' said he, 'i can't help fancying there's an extra cause for
this.  what has there been to do at the grange?  we've odd reports up
here.  a stout, hearty lass like catherine does not fall ill for a
trifle; and that sort of people sh
 
 ___________________________
 
be done now?  there was a bare possibility of
overtaking them if pursued instantly.  _i_ could not pursue them,
however; and i dared not rouse the family, and fill the place with
confusion; still less unfold the business to my master, absorbed as he
was in his present calamity, and having no heart to spare for a second
grief!  i saw nothing for it but to hold my tongue, and suffer matters to
take their course; and kenneth being arrived, i went with a badly
composed countenance to announce him.  catherine lay in a troubled sleep:
her husband had succeeded in soothing the excess of frenzy; he now hung
over her pillow, watching every shade and every change of her painfully
expressive features.

the doctor, on examining the case for himself, spoke hopefully to him of
its having a favourable termination, if we could only preserve around her
perfect and constant tranquillity.  to me, he signified the threatening
danger was not so much death, as permanent alienation of intellect.

i did not close my e
 
 ___________________________
 
r.  no mother could have nursed an only child more devotedly
than edgar tended her.  day and night he was watching, and patiently
enduring all the annoyances that irritable nerves and a shaken reason
could inflict; and, though kenneth remarked that what he saved from the
grave would only recompense his care by forming the source of constant
future anxiety--in fact, that his health and strength were being
sacrificed to preserve a mere ruin of humanity--he knew no limits in
gratitude and joy when catherine's life was declared out of danger; and
hour after hour he would sit beside her, tracing the gradual return to
bodily health, and flattering his too sanguine hopes with the illusion
that her mind would settle back to its right balance also, and she would
soon be entirely her former self.

the first time she left her chamber was at the commencement of the
following march.  mr. linton had put on her pillow, in the morning, a
handful of golden crocuses; her eye, long stranger to any gleam of
pleasu
 
 ___________________________
 
 in waking, and shone delighted as she gathered them
eagerly together.

'these are the earliest flowers at the heights,' she exclaimed.  'they
remind me of soft thaw winds, and warm sunshine, and nearly melted snow.
edgar, is there not a south wind, and is not the snow almost gone?'

'the snow is quite gone down here, darling,' replied her husband; 'and i
only see two white spots on the whole range of moors: the sky is blue,
and the larks are singing, and the becks and brooks are all brim full.
catherine, last spring at this time, i was longing to have you under this
roof; now, i wish you were a mile or two up those hills: the air blows so
sweetly, i feel that it would cure you.'

'i shall never be there but once more,' said the invalid; 'and then
you'll leave me, and i shall remain for ever.  next spring you'll long
again to have me under this roof, and you'll look back and think you were
happy to-day.'

linton lavished on her the kindest caresses, and tried to cheer her by
the fondest words; 
 
 ___________________________
 
eeding had offended him: asserting that she could not help it
then, and being done, she had now no power to repeal it.  linton did not
reply to this, i believe; and, in a fortnight more, i got a long letter,
which i considered odd, coming from the pen of a bride just out of the
honeymoon.  i'll read it: for i keep it yet.  any relic of the dead is
precious, if they were valued living.

* * * * *

dear ellen, it begins,--i came last night to wuthering heights, and
heard, for the first time, that catherine has been, and is yet, very ill.
i must not write to her, i suppose, and my brother is either too angry or
too distressed to answer what i sent him.  still, i must write to
somebody, and the only choice left me is you.

inform edgar that i'd give the world to see his face again--that my heart
returned to thrushcross grange in twenty-four hours after i left it, and
is there at this moment, full of warm feelings for him, and catherine!  _i
can't follow it though_--(these words are underlined)--the
 
 ___________________________
 
te his torch to a
level with my face, squint malignantly, project his under-lip, and turn
away.  then he took the two horses, and led them into the stables;
reappearing for the purpose of locking the outer gate, as if we lived in
an ancient castle.

heathcliff stayed to speak to him, and i entered the kitchen--a dingy,
untidy hole; i daresay you would not know it, it is so changed since it
was in your charge.  by the fire stood a ruffianly child, strong in limb
and dirty in garb, with a look of catherine in his eyes and about his
mouth.

'this is edgar's legal nephew,' i reflected--'mine in a manner; i must
shake hands, and--yes--i must kiss him.  it is right to establish a good
understanding at the beginning.'

i approached, and, attempting to take his chubby fist, said--'how do you
do, my dear?'

he replied in a jargon i did not comprehend.

'shall you and i be friends, hareton?' was my next essay at conversation.

an oath, and a threat to set throttler on me if i did not 'frame off'
rewarded
 
 ___________________________
 
former a great deal too fine, but the latter, i'm sure,
as sad as he could desire) with sovereign contempt.

i walked round the yard, and through a wicket, to another door, at which
i took the liberty of knocking, in hopes some more civil servant might
show himself.  after a short suspense, it was opened by a tall, gaunt
man, without neckerchief, and otherwise extremely slovenly; his features
were lost in masses of shaggy hair that hung on his shoulders; and _his_
eyes, too, were like a ghostly catherine's with all their beauty
annihilated.

'what's your business here?' he demanded, grimly.  'who are you?'

'my name was isabella linton,' i replied.  'you've seen me before, sir.
i'm lately married to mr. heathcliff, and he has brought me here--i
suppose, by your permission.'

'is he come back, then?' asked the hermit, glaring like a hungry wolf.

'yes--we came just now,' i said; 'but he left me by the kitchen door; and
when i would have gone in, your little boy played sentinel over the
place, an
 
 ___________________________
 
 so misanthropical, that i shrank from disturbing him
again.

you'll not be surprised, ellen, at my feeling particularly cheerless,
seated in worse than solitude on that inhospitable hearth, and
remembering that four miles distant lay my delightful home, containing
the only people i loved on earth; and there might as well be the
atlantic to part us, instead of those four miles: i could not overpass
them! i questioned with myself--where must i turn for comfort? and--mind
you don't tell edgar, or catherine--above every sorrow beside, this rose
pre-eminent: despair at finding nobody who could or would be my ally
against heathcliff! i had sought shelter at wuthering heights, almost
gladly, because i was secured by that arrangement from living alone with
him; but he knew the people we were coming amongst, and he did not fear
their intermeddling.

i sat and thought a doleful time: the clock struck eight, and nine, and
still my companion paced to and fro, his head bent on his breast, and
perfectly sil
 
 ___________________________
 
use of my staying up so late--that he had the
key of our room in his pocket.  the adjective _our_ gave mortal offence.
he swore it was not, nor ever should be, mine; and he'd--but i'll not
repeat his language, nor describe his habitual conduct: he is ingenious
and unresting in seeking to gain my abhorrence!  i sometimes wonder at
him with an intensity that deadens my fear: yet, i assure you, a tiger or
a venomous serpent could not rouse terror in me equal to that which he
wakens.  he told me of catherine's illness, and accused my brother of
causing it promising that i should be edgar's proxy in suffering, till he
could get hold of him.

i do hate him--i am wretched--i have been a fool!  beware of uttering one
breath of this to any one at the grange.  i shall expect you every
day--don't disappoint me!--isabella.




chapter xiv


as soon as i had perused this epistle i went to the master, and informed
him that his sister had arrived at the heights, and sent me a letter
expressing her sorrow for 
 
 ___________________________
 
st not expect either
a letter or a visit from him at present.  he sends his love, ma'am, and
his wishes for your happiness, and his pardon for the grief you have
occasioned; but he thinks that after this time his household and the
household here should drop intercommunication, as nothing could come of
keeping it up.'

mrs. heathcliff's lip quivered slightly, and she returned to her seat in
the window.  her husband took his stand on the hearthstone, near me, and
began to put questions concerning catherine.  i told him as much as i
thought proper of her illness, and he extorted from me, by
cross-examination, most of the facts connected with its origin.  i blamed
her, as she deserved, for bringing it all on herself; and ended by hoping
that he would follow mr. linton's example and avoid future interference
with his family, for good or evil.

'mrs. linton is now just recovering,' i said; 'she'll never be like she
was, but her life is spared; and if you really have a regard for her,
you'll shun cros
 
 ___________________________
 
sing her way again: nay, you'll move out of this country
entirely; and that you may not regret it, i'll inform you catherine
linton is as different now from your old friend catherine earnshaw, as
that young lady is different from me.  her appearance is changed greatly,
her character much more so; and the person who is compelled, of
necessity, to be her companion, will only sustain his affection hereafter
by the remembrance of what she once was, by common humanity, and a sense
of duty!'

'that is quite possible,' remarked heathcliff, forcing himself to seem
calm: 'quite possible that your master should have nothing but common
humanity and a sense of duty to fall back upon.  
 
 ___________________________
 
but do you imagine that
i shall leave catherine to his _duty_ and _humanity_? and can you compare
my feelings respecting catherine to his?  before you leave this house, i
must exact a promise from you that you'll get me an interview with her:
consent, or refuse, i _will_ see her!  what do you say?'

'i say, mr. heathcliff,' i replied, 'you must not: you never shall,
through my means.  another encounter between you and the master would
kill her altogether.'

'with your aid that may be avoided,' he continued; 'and should there be
danger of such an event--should he be the cause of adding a single
trouble more to her existence
 
 ___________________________
 
--why, i think i shall be justified in going
to extremes!  i wish you had sincerity enough to tell me whether
catherine would suffer greatly from his loss: the fear that she would
restrains me.  and there you see the distinction between our feelings:
had he been in my place, and i in his, though i hated him with a hatred
that turned my life to gall, i never would have raised a hand against
him.  you may look incredulous, if you please!  i never would have
banished him from her society as long as she desired his.  the moment her
regard ceased, i would have torn his heart out, and drunk his blood!  but,
till then-
 
 ___________________________
 
ourhood last summer; but only her own assurance could make me admit
the horrible idea again.  and then, linton would be nothing, nor hindley,
nor all the dreams that ever i dreamt.  two words would comprehend my
future--_death_ and _hell_: existence, after losing her, would be hell.
yet i was a fool to fancy for a moment that she valued edgar linton's
attachment more than mine.  if he loved with all the powers of his puny
being, he couldn't love as much in eighty years as i could in a day.  and
catherine has a heart as deep as i have: the sea could be as readily
contained in that horse-trough as her whole affection be monopolised by
him.  tush!  he is scarcely a degree dearer to her than her dog, or her
horse.  it is not in him to be loved like me: how can she love in him
what he has not?'

'catherine and edgar are as fond of each other as any two people can be,'
cried isabella, with sudden vivacity.  'no one has a right to talk in
that manner, and i won't hear my brother depreciated in silence
 
 ___________________________
 
of your own accord?'

'take care, ellen!' answered isabella, her eyes sparkling irefully; there
was no misdoubting by their expression the full success of her partner's
endeavours to make himself detested.  'don't put faith in a single word
he speaks.  he's a lying fiend! a monster, and not a human being!  i've
been told i might leave him before; and i've made the attempt, but i dare
not repeat it!  only, ellen, promise you'll not mention a syllable of his
infamous conversation to my brother or catherine.  whatever he may
pretend, he wishes to provoke edgar to desperation: he says he has
married me on purpose to obtain power over him; and he sha'n't obtain
it--i'll die first!  i just hope, i pray, that he may forget his
diabolical prudence and kill me!  the single pleasure i can imagine is to
die, or to see him dead!'

'there--that will do for the present!' said heathcliff.  'if you are
called upon in a court of law, you'll remember her language, nelly!  and
take a good look at that countenance
 
 ___________________________
 
e the worms writhe, the more i yearn to
crush out their entrails!  it is a moral teething; and i grind with
greater energy in proportion to the increase of pain.'

'do you understand what the word pity means?' i said, hastening to resume
my bonnet.  'did you ever feel a touch of it in your life?'

'put that down!' he interrupted, perceiving my intention to depart.  'you
are not going yet.  come here now, nelly: i must either persuade or
compel you to aid me in fulfilling my determination to see catherine, and
that without delay.  i swear that i meditate no harm: i don't desire to
cause any disturbance, or to exasperate or insult mr. linton; i only wish
to hear from herself how she is, and why she has been ill; and to ask if
anything that i could do would be of use to her.  last night i was in the
grange garden six hours, and i'll return there to-night; and every night
i'll haunt the place, and every day, till i find an opportunity of
entering.  if edgar linton meets me, i shall not hesitate to 
 
 ___________________________
 
on.  'the commonest occurrence
startles her painfully,' i said.  'she's all nerves, and she couldn't
bear the surprise, i'm positive.  don't persist, sir! or else i shall be
obliged to inform my master of your designs; and he'll take measures to
secure his house and its inmates from any such unwarrantable intrusions!'

'in that case i'll take measures to secure you, woman!' exclaimed
heathcliff; 'you shall not leave wuthering heights till to-morrow
morning.  it is a foolish story to assert that catherine could not bear
to see me; and as to surprising her, i don't desire it: you must prepare
her--ask her if i may come.  you say she never mentions my name, and that
i am never mentioned to her.  to whom should she mention me if i am a
forbidden topic in the house?  she thinks you are all spies for her
husband.  oh, i've no doubt she's in hell among you!  i guess by her
silence, as much as anything, what she feels.  you say she is often
restless, and anxious-looking: is that a proof of tranquillity
 
 ___________________________
 
?  you talk
of her mind being unsettled.  how the devil could it be otherwise in her
frightful isolation?  and that insipid, paltry creature attending her
from _duty_ and _humanity_!  from _pity_ and _charity_!  he might as well
plant an oak in a flower-pot, and expect it to thrive, as imagine he can
restore her to vigour in the soil of his shallow cares?  let us settle it
at once: will you stay here, and am i to fight my way to catherine over
linton and his footman?  or will you be my friend, as you have been
hitherto, and do what i request?  decide! because there is no reason for
my lingering another minute, if you persist in your stubborn ill-nature!'

well, mr. lockwood, i argued and complained, and flatly refused him fifty
times; but in the long run he forced me to an agreement.  i engaged to
carry a letter from him to my mistress; and should she consent, i
promised to let him have intelligence of linton's next absence from
 
 ___________________________
 
 home,
when he might come, and get in as he was able: i wouldn't be there, and
my fellow-servants should be equally out of the way.  was it right or
wrong?  i fear it was wrong, though expedient.  i thought i prevented
another explosion by my compliance; and i thought, too, it might create a
favourable crisis in catherine's mental illness: and then i remembered
mr. edgar's stern rebuke of my carrying tales; and i tried to smooth away
all disquietude on the subject, by affirming, with frequent iteration,
that that betrayal of trust, if it merited so harsh an appellation,
should be the last.  notwithstanding, my journey homeward was sadder than
my journey thither; and many misgivings i had, ere i could prevail on
myself to put the missive into mrs. linton's hand.

but here is kenneth; i'll go down, and tell him ho
 
 ___________________________
 
w much better you are.
my history is _dree_, as we say, and will serve to while away another
morning.

dree, and dreary!  i reflected as the good woman descended to receive the
doctor: and not exactly of the kind which i should have chosen to amuse
me.  but never mind!  i'll extract wholesome medicines from mrs. dean's
bitter herbs; and firstly, let me beware of the fascination that lurks in
catherine heathcliff's brilliant eyes.  i should be in a curious taking
if i surrendered my heart to that young person, and the daughter turned
out a second edition of the mother.




chapter xv


another week over--and i am so many days nearer health, and spring!  i
have now heard all my neighbour's history, at different sittings, as the
housekeeper could spare time from more important occupations.  i'll
continue it in her own words, only a little condensed.  she is, on the
whole, a very fair narrator, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and i don't think i could improve her style.

in the evening, she said, the evening of my visit to the heights, i knew,
as well as if i saw him, that mr. heathcliff was about the place; and i
shunned going out, because i still carried his letter in my pocket, and
didn't want to be threatened or teased any more.  i had made up my mind
not to give it till my master went somewhere, as i could not guess how
its receipt would affect catherine.  the consequence was, that it did not
reach her before the lapse of three days.  the fourth was sunday, and i
brought it into her room after the family were gone to church.  there was
a manservant left to keep the house with me, and we generally made a
practice of locking the doors during the hours of service; but on that
occasion the weather was so warm and pleasant that i set them wide open,
and, to fulfil my engagement, as i knew who would be coming, i told my
companion that the mistress wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ush him off angrily; and then he
took care to let her alone, for he was certain of doing no good.

gimmerton chapel bells were still ringing; and the full, mellow flow of
the beck in the valley came soothingly on the ear.  it was a sweet
substitute for the yet absent murmur of the summer foliage, which drowned
that music about the grange when the trees were in leaf.  at wuthering
heights it always sounded on quiet days following a great thaw or a
season of steady rain.  and of wuthering heights catherine was thinking
as she listened: that is, if she thought or listened at all; but she had
the vague, distant look i mentioned before, which expressed no
recognition of material things either by ear or eye.

'there's a letter for you, mrs. linton,' i said, gently inserting it in
one hand that rested on her knee.  'you must read it immediately, because
it wants an answer.  shall i break the seal?'  'yes,' she answered,
without altering the direction of her eyes.  i opened it--it was very
short.  'now
 
 ___________________________
 
g lying on the sunny grass beneath raise
its ears as if about to bark, and then smoothing them back, announce, by
a wag of the tail, that some one approached whom it did not consider a
stranger.  mrs. linton bent forward, and listened breathlessly.  the
minute after a step traversed the hall; the open house was too tempting
for heathcliff to resist walking in: most likely he supposed that i was
inclined to shirk my promise, and so resolved to trust to his own
audacity.  with straining eagerness catherine gazed towards the entrance
of her chamber.  he did not hit the right room directly: she motioned me
to admit him, but he found it out ere i could reach the door, and in a
stride or two was at her side, and had her grasped in his arms.

he neither spoke nor loosed his hold for some five minutes, during which
period he bestowed more kisses than ever he gave in his life before, i
daresay: but then my mistress had kissed him first, and i plainly saw
that he could hardly bear, for downright agony, t
 
 ___________________________
 
 look into her face!
the same conviction had stricken him as me, from the instant he beheld
her, that there was no prospect of ultimate recovery there--she was
fated, sure to die.

'oh, cathy!  oh, my life! how can i bear it?' was the first sentence he
uttered, in a tone that did not seek to disguise his despair.  and now he
stared at her so earnestly that i thought the very intensity of his gaze
would bring tears into his eyes; but they burned with anguish: they did
not melt.

'what now?' said catherine, leaning back, and returning his look with a
suddenly clouded brow: her humour was a mere vane for constantly varying
caprices.  'you and edgar have broken my heart, heathcliff!  and you both
come to bewail the deed to me, as if you were the people to be pitied!  i
shall not pity you, not i.  you have killed me--and thriven on it, i
think.  how strong you are!  how many years do you mean to live after i
am gone?'

heathcliff had knelt on one knee to embrace her; he attempted to rise,
but she se
 
 ___________________________
 
ized his hair, and kept him down.

'i wish i could hold you,' she continued, bitterly, 'till we were both
dead!  i shouldn't care what you suffered.  i care nothing for your
sufferings.  why shouldn't you suffer?  i do!  will you forget me?  will
you be happy when i am in the earth?  will you say twenty years hence,
"that's the grave of catherine earnshaw?  i loved her long ago, and was
wretched to lose her; but it is past.  i've loved many others since: my
children are dearer to me than she was; and, at death, i shall not
rejoice that i am going to her: i shall be sorry that i must leave
them!"  will you say so, heathcliff?'

'don't torture me till i'm as mad as yourself,' cried he, wrenching his
head free, and grinding his teeth.

the two, to a cool spectator, made a strange and fearful picture.  well
might catherine deem that heaven 
 
 ___________________________
 
with one hand, he had taken her arm with the other; and
so inadequate was his stock of gentleness to the requirements of her
condition, that on his letting go i saw four distinct impressions left
blue in the colourless skin.

'are you possessed with a devil,' he pursued, savagely, 'to talk in that
manner to me when you are dying?  do you reflect that all those words
will be branded in my memory, and eating deeper eternally after you have
left me?  you know you lie to say i have killed you: and, catherine, you
know that i could as soon forget you as my existence!  is it not
sufficient for your infernal selfishness, that while you are at peace i
shall writhe in the torments of hell?'

'i shall not be at peace,' moaned catherine, recalled to a sense of
physical weakness by the violent, unequal throbbing of her heart, which
beat visibly and audibly under this excess of agitation.  she said
nothing further till the paroxysm was over; then she continued, more
kindly--

'i'm not wishing you greater to
 
 ___________________________
 
arably beyond and above you all.  i _wonder_ he
won't be near me!'  she went on to herself.  'i thought he wished it.
heathcliff, dear! you should not be sullen now.  do come to me,
heathcliff.'

in her eagerness she rose and supported herself on the arm of the chair.
at that earnest appeal he turned to her, looking absolutely desperate.
his eyes, wide and wet, at last flashed fiercely on her; his breast
heaved convulsively.  an instant they held asunder, and then how they met
i hardly saw, but catherine made a spring, and he caught her, and they
were locked in an embrace from which i thought my mistress would never be
released alive: in fact, to my eyes, she seemed directly insensible.  he
flung himself into the nearest seat, and on my approaching hurriedly to
ascertain if she had fainted, he gnashed at me, and foamed like a mad
dog, and gathered her to him with greedy jealousy.  i did not feel as if
i were in the company of a creature of my own species: it appeared that
he would not understan
 
 ___________________________
 
d, though i spoke to him; so i stood off, and held
my tongue, in great perplexity.

a movement of catherine's relieved me a little presently: she put up her
hand to clasp his neck, and bring her cheek to his as he held her; while
he, in return, covering her with frantic caresses, said wildly--

'you teach me now how cruel you've been--cruel and false.  _why_ did you
despise me?  _why_ did you betray your own heart, cathy?  i have not one
word of comfort.  you deserve this.  you have killed yourself.  yes, you
may kiss me, and cry; and wring out my kisses and tears: they'll blight
you--they'll damn yo
 
 ___________________________
 
t--answer me--for the poor fancy you felt for linton?
because misery and degradation, and death, and nothing that god or satan
could inflict would have parted us, _you_, of your own will, did it.  i
have not broken your heart--_you_ have broken it; and in breaking it, you
have broken mine.  so much the worse for me that i am strong.  do i want
to live?  what kind of living will it be when you--oh, god! would _you_
like to live with your soul in the grave?'

'let me alone.  let me alone,' sobbed catherine.  'if i've done wrong,
i'm dying for it.  it is enough!  you left me too: but i won't upbraid
you!  i forgive you.  forgive me!'

'it is hard to forgive, and to look at those eyes, and feel those wasted
hands,' he answered.  'kiss me again; and don't let me see your eyes!  i
forgive what you have done to me.  i love _my_ murderer--but _yours_!  how
can i?'

they were silent--their faces hid against each other, and washed by each
other's tears.  at least, i suppose the weeping was on both sides;
 
 ___________________________
 
 as it
seemed heathcliff could weep on a great occasion like this.

i grew very uncomfortable, meanwhile; for the afternoon wore fast away,
the man whom i had sent off returned from his errand, and i could
distinguish, by the shine of the western sun up the valley, a concourse
thickening outside gimmerton chapel porch.

'service is over,' i announced.  'my master will be here in half an
hour.'

heathcliff groaned a curse, and strained catherine closer: she never
moved.

ere long i perceived a group of the servants passing up the road towards
the kitchen wing.  mr. linton was not far behind; he opened the gate
himself and sauntered slowly up, probably enjoying the lovely afternoon
that breathed as soft as summer.

'now he is here,' i exclaimed.  'for heaven's sake, hurry down!  you'll
not meet any one on the front stairs.  do be quick; and stay among the
trees till he is fairly in.'

'i must go, cathy,' said heathcliff, seeking to extr
 
 ___________________________
 
' he pleaded earnestly.

'not for one minute,' she replied.

'i _must_--linton will be up immediately,' persisted the alarmed
intruder.

he would have risen, and unfixed her fingers by the act--she clung fast,
gasping: there was mad resolution in her face.

'no!' she shrieked.  'oh, don't, don't go.  it is the last time!  edgar
will not hurt us.  heathcliff, i shall die!  i shall die!'

'damn the fool!  there he is,' cried heathcliff, sinking back into his
seat.  'hush, my darling!  hush, hush, catherine!  i'll stay.  if he shot
me so, i'd expire with a blessing on my lips.'

and there they were fast again.  i heard my master mounting the
stairs--the cold sweat ran from my forehead: i was horrified.

'are you going to listen to her ravings?' i said, passionately.  'she
does not know what she says.  will you ruin her, because she has not wit
to help herself?  get up!  you could be free instantly.  that is the most
diabolical deed that ever you did.  we are all done for--master,
mistress, and ser
 
 ___________________________
 
vant.'

i wrung my hands, and cried out; and mr. linton hastened his step at the
noise.  in the midst of my agitation, i was sincerely glad to observe
that catherine's arms had fallen relaxed, and her head hung down.

'she's fainted, or dead,' i thought: 'so much the better.  far better
that she should be dead, than lingering a burden and a misery-maker to
all about her.'

edgar sprang to his unbidden guest, blanched with astonishment and rage.
what he meant to do i cannot tell; however, the other stopped all
demonstrations, at once, by placing the lifeless-looking form in his
arms.

'look there!' he said.  'unless you be a fiend, help her first--then you
s
 
 ___________________________
 
hall speak to me!'

he walked into the parlour, and sat down.  mr. linton summoned me, and
with great difficulty, and after resorting to many means, we managed to
restore her to sensation; but she was all bewildered; she sighed, and
moaned, and knew nobody.  edgar, in his anxiety for her, forgot her hated
friend.  i did not.  i went, at the earliest opportunity, and besought
him to depart; affirming that catherine was better, and he should hear
from me in the morning how she passed the night.

'i shall not refuse to go out of doors,' he answered; 'but i shall stay
in the garden: and, nelly, mind you keep your word to-morrow.  i shall be
under those larch-trees.  mind! or i pay another visit, whether linton be
in or not.'

he sent a rapid glance through the half-open door of the chamber, and,
ascertaining that what i stated was apparently true, delivered the house
of his luckless presence.




chapter xvi
 
 ___________________________
 



about twelve o'clock that night was born the catherine you saw at
wuthering heights: a puny, seven-months' child; and two hours after the
mother died, having never recovered sufficient consciousness to miss
heathcliff, or know edgar.  the latter's distraction at his bereavement
is a subject too painful to be dwelt on; its after-effects showed how
deep the sorrow sunk.  a great addition, in my eyes, was his being left
without an heir.  i bemoaned that, as i gazed on the feeble orphan; and i
mentally abused old linton for (what was only natural parti
 
 ___________________________
 
, but i am seldom otherwise than
happy while watching in the chamber of death, should no frenzied or
despairing mourner share the duty with me.  i see a repose that neither
earth nor hell can break, and i feel an assurance of the endless and
shadowless hereafter--the eternity they have entered--where life is
boundless in its duration, and love in its sympathy, and joy in its
fulness.  i noticed on that occasion how much selfishness there is even
in a love like mr. linton's, when he so regretted catherine's blessed
release!  to be sure, one might have doubted, after the wayward and
impatient existence she had led, whether she merited a haven of peace at
last.  one might doubt in seasons of cold reflection; but not then, in
the presence of her corpse.  it asserted its own tranquillity, which
seemed a pledge of equal quiet to its former inhabitant.

do you believe such people are happy in the other world, sir?  i'd give a
great deal to know.

i declined answering mrs. dean's question, which struck
 
 ___________________________
 
 me as something
heterodox.  she proceeded:

retracing the course of catherine linton, i fear we have no right to
think she is; but we'll leave her with her maker.

the master looked asleep, and i ventured soon after sunrise to quit the
room and steal out to the pure refreshing air.  the servants thought me
gone to shake off the drowsiness of my protracted watch; in reality, my
chief motive was seeing mr. heathcliff.  if he had remained among the
larches all night, he would have heard nothing of the stir at the grange;
unless, perhaps, he might catch the gallop of the mes
 
 ___________________________
 
 her face; and her latest
ideas wandered back to pleasant early days.  her life closed in a gentle
dream--may she wake as kindly in the other world!'

'may she wake in torment!' he cried, with frightful vehemence, stamping
his foot, and groaning in a sudden paroxysm of ungovernable passion.
'why, she's a liar to the end!  where is she?  not _there_--not in
heaven--not perished--where?  oh! you said you cared nothing for my
sufferings!  and i pray one prayer--i repeat it till my tongue
stiffens--catherine earnshaw, may you not rest as long as i am living;
you said i killed you--haunt me, then!  the murdered _do_ haunt their
murderers, i believe.  i know that ghosts _have_ wandered on earth.  be
with me always--take any form--drive me mad! only _do_ not leave me in
this abyss, where i cannot find you!  oh, god! it is unutterable!  i
_cannot_ live without my life!  i _cannot_ live without my soul!'

he dashed his head against the knotted trunk; and, lifting up his eyes,
howled, not like a man, but
 
 ___________________________
 
ce of bestowing on
the faded image of his idol one final adieu.  he did not omit to avail
himself of the opportunity, cautiously and briefly; too cautiously to
betray his presence by the slightest noise.  indeed, i shouldn't have
discovered that he had been there, except for the disarrangement of the
drapery about the corpse's face, and for observing on the floor a curl of
light hair, fastened with a silver thread; which, on examination, i
ascertained to have been taken from a locket hung round catherine's neck.
heathcliff had opened the trinket and cast out its contents, replacing
them by a black lock of his own.  i twisted the two, and enclosed them
together.

mr. earnshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains of his sister
to the grave; he sent no excuse, but he never came; so that, besides her
husband, the mourners were wholly composed of tenants and servants.
isabella was not asked.

the place of catherine's interment, to the surprise of the villagers, was
neither in the chapel und
 
 ___________________________
 
down my neck now!
the fire does make it smart.'

she insisted on my fulfilling her directions, before she would let me
touch her; and not till after the coachman had been instructed to get
ready, and a maid set to pack up some necessary attire, did i obtain her
consent for binding the wound and helping to change her garments.

'now, ellen,' she said, when my task was finished and she was seated in
an easy-chair on the hearth, with a cup of tea before her, 'you sit down
opposite me, and put poor catherine's baby away: i don't like to see it!
you mustn't think i care little for catherine, because i behaved so
foolishly on entering: i've cried, too, bitterly--yes, more than any one
else has reason to cry.  we parted unreconciled, you remember, and i
sha'n't forgive myself.  but, for all that, i was not going to sympathise
with him--the brute beast!  oh, give me the poker!  this is the last
thing of his i have about me:' she slipped the gold ring from her third
finger, and threw it on the floor.  '
 
 ___________________________
 
 to make me feel pretty certain that he
would not chase me over england, supposing i contrived a clear escape;
and therefore i must get quite away.  i've recovered from my first desire
to be killed by him: i'd rather he'd kill himself!  he has extinguished
my love effectually, and so i'm at my ease.  i can recollect yet how i
loved him; and can dimly imagine that i could still be loving him, if--no,
no!  even if he had doted on me, the devilish nature would have revealed
its existence somehow.  catherine had an awfully perverted taste to
esteem him so dearly, knowing him so well.  monster! would that he could
be blotted out of creation, and out of my memory!'

'hush, hush!  he's a human being,' i said.  'be more charitable: there
are worse men than he is yet!'

'he's not a human being,' she retorted; 'and he has no claim on my
charity.  i gave him my heart, and he took and pinched it to death, and
flung it back to me.  people feel with their hearts, ellen: and since he
has destroyed mine, i hav
 
 ___________________________
 
e not power to feel for him: and i would not,
though he groaned from this to his dying day, and wept tears of blood for
catherine!  no, indeed, indeed, i wouldn't!'  and here isabella began to
cry; but, immediately dashing the water from her lashes, she recommenced.
'you asked, what has driven me to flight at last?  i was compelled to
attempt it, because i had succeeded in rousing his rage a pitch above his
malignity.  pulling out the nerves with red hot pincers requires more
coolness than knocking on the head.  he was worked up to forget the
fiendish prudence he boasted of, and proceeded to murderous violence.  i
experie
 
 ___________________________
 
oveting his company!  there
he has continued, praying like a methodist: only the deity he implored is
senseless dust and ashes; and god, when addressed, was curiously
confounded with his own black father!  after concluding these precious
orisons--and they lasted generally till he grew hoarse and his voice was
strangled in his throat--he would be off again; always straight down to
the grange!  i wonder edgar did not send for a constable, and give him
into custody!  for me, grieved as i was about catherine, it was
impossible to avoid regarding this season of deliverance from degrading
oppression as a holiday.

'i recovered spirits sufficient to bear joseph's eternal lectures without
weeping, and to move up and down the house less with the foot of a
frightened thief than formerly.  you wouldn't think that i should cry at
anything joseph could say; but he and hareton are detestable companions.
i'd rather sit with hindley, and hear his awful talk, than with "t'
little maister" and his staunch suppor
 
 ___________________________
 
u're a free woman!"

'he took the implements which i described to you in my letter from his
breast, and would have turned down the candle.  i snatched it away,
however, and seized his arm.

'"i'll not hold my tongue!" i said; "you mustn't touch him.  let the door
remain shut, and be quiet!"

'"no!  i've formed my resolution, and by god i'll execute it!" cried the
desperate being.  "i'll do you a kindness in spite of yourself, and
hareton justice!  and you needn't trouble your head to screen me;
catherine is gone.  nobody alive would regret me, or be ashamed, though i
cut my throat this minute--and it's time to make an end!"

'i might as well have struggled with a bear, or reasoned with a lunatic.
the only resource left me was to run to a lattice and warn his intended
victim of the fate which awaited him.

'"you'd better seek shelter somewhere else to-night!" i exclaimed, in
rather a triumphant tone.  "mr. earnshaw has a mind to shoot you, if you
persist in endeavouring to enter."

'"you'd bette
 
 ___________________________
 
ol."

'"let me in by the kitchen door," he said.

'"hindley will be there before me," i answered: "and that's a poor love
of yours that cannot bear a shower of snow!  we were left at peace in our
beds as long as the summer moon shone, but the moment a blast of winter
returns, you must run for shelter!  heathcliff, if i were you, i'd go
stretch myself over her grave and die like a faithful dog.  the world is
surely not worth living in now, is it?  you had distinctly impressed on
me the idea that catherine was the whole joy of your life: i can't
imagine how you think of surviving her loss."

'"he's there, is he?" exclaimed my companion, rushing to the gap.  "if i
can get my arm out i can hit him!"

'i'm afraid, ellen, you'll set me down as really wicked; but you don't
know all, so don't judge.  i wouldn't have aided or abetted an attempt on
even _his_ life for anything.  wish that he were dead, i must; and
therefore i was fearfully disappointed, and unnerved by terror for the
consequences of my t
 
 ___________________________
 
m to my level.  as he was the first to injure, make him the
first to implore pardon; and then--why then, ellen, i might show you some
generosity.  but it is utterly impossible i can ever be revenged, and
therefore i cannot forgive him.  hindley wanted some water, and i handed
him a glass, and asked him how he was.

'"not as ill as i wish," he replied.  "but leaving out my arm, every inch
of me is as sore as if i had been fighting with a legion of imps!"

'"yes, no wonder," was my next remark.  "catherine used to boast that she
stood between you and bodily harm: she meant that certain persons would
not hurt you for fear of offending her.  it's well people don't _really_
rise from their grave, or, last night, she might have witnessed a
repulsive scene!  are not you bruised, and cut over your chest and
shoulders?"

'"i can't say," he answered, "but what do you mean?  did he dare to
strike me when i was down?"

'"he trampled on and kicked you, and dashed you on the ground," i
whispered.  "and his m
 
 ___________________________
 
if god would but give me strength to strangle him in my last agony,
i'd go to hell with joy," groaned the impatient man, writhing to rise,
and sinking back in despair, convinced of his inadequacy for the
struggle.

'"nay, it's enough that he has murdered one of you," i observed aloud.
"at the grange, every one knows your sister would have been living now
had it not been for mr. heathcliff.  after all, it is preferable to be
hated than loved by him.  when i recollect how happy we were--how happy
catherine was before he came--i'm fit to curse the day."

'most likely, heathcliff noticed more the truth of what was said, than
the spirit of the person who said it.  his attention was roused, i saw,
for his eyes rained down tears among the ashes, and he drew his breath in
suffocating sighs.  i stared full at him, and laughed scornfully.  the
clouded windows of hell flashed a moment towards me; the fiend which
usually looked out, however, was so dimmed and drowned that i did not
fear to hazard another s
 
 ___________________________
 
ound of derision.

'"get up, and begone out of my sight," said the mourner.

'i guessed he uttered those words, at least, though his voice was hardly
intelligible.

'"i beg your pardon," i replied.  "but i loved catherine too; and her
brother requires attendance, which, for her sake, i shall supply.  now,
that she's dead, i see her in hindley: hindley has exactly her eyes, if
you had not tried to gouge them out, and made them black and red; and
her--"

'"get up, wretched idiot, before i stamp you to death!" he cried, making
a movement that caused me to make one also.

'"but then," i continued, holding myself ready to flee, "if poor
catherine had trusted you, and assumed the ridiculous, contemptible,
degrading ti
 
 ___________________________
 
ough marshes: precipitating myself, in fact, towards the
beacon-light of the grange.  and far rather would i be condemned to a
perpetual dwelling in the infernal regions than, even for one night,
abide beneath the roof of wuthering heights again.'

isabella ceased speaking, and took a drink of tea; then she rose, and
bidding me put on her bonnet, and a great shawl i had brought, and
turning a deaf ear to my entreaties for her to remain another hour, she
stepped on to a chair, kissed edgar's and catherine's portraits, bestowed
a similar salute on me, and descended to the carriage, accompanied by
fanny, who yelped wild with joy at recovering her mistress.  she was
driven away, never to revisit this neighbourhood: but a regular
correspondence was established between her and my master when things were
more settled.  i believe her new abode was in the south, near london;
there she had a son born a few months subsequent to her escape.  he was
christened linton, and, from the first, she reported him t
 
 ___________________________
 
existence of the child.  still, he didn't molest her:
for which forbearance she might thank his aversion, i suppose.  he often
asked about the infant, when he saw me; and on hearing its name, smiled
grimly, and observed: 'they wish me to hate it too, do they?'

'i don't think they wish you to know anything about it,' i answered.

'but i'll have it,' he said, 'when i want it.  they may reckon on that!'

fortunately its mother died before the time arrived; some thirteen years
after the decease of catherine, when linton was twelve, or a little more.

on the day succeeding isabella's unexpected visit i had no opportunity of
speaking to my master: he shunned conversation, and was fit for
discussing nothing.  when i could get him to listen, i saw it pleased him
that his sister had left her husband; whom he abhorred with an intensity
which the mildness of his nature would scarcely seem to allow.  so deep
and sensitive was his aversion, that he refrained from going anywhere
where he was likely to see o
 
 ___________________________
 
ar of heathcliff.  grief, and that
together, transformed him into a complete hermit: he threw up his office
of magistrate, ceased even to attend church, avoided the village on all
occasions, and spent a life of entire seclusion within the limits of his
park and grounds; only varied by solitary rambles on the moors, and
visits to the grave of his wife, mostly at evening, or early morning
before other wanderers were abroad.  but he was too good to be thoroughly
unhappy long.  _he_ didn't pray for catherine's soul to haunt him.  time
brought resignation, and a melancholy sweeter than common joy.  he
recalled her memory with ardent, tender love, and hopeful aspiring to the
better world; where he doubted not she was gone.

and he had earthly consolation and affections also.  for a few days, i
said, he seemed regardless of the puny successor to the departed: that
coldness melted as fast as snow in april, and ere the tiny thing could
stammer a word or totter a step it wielded a despot's sceptre in his
 
 ___________________________
 

heart.  it was named catherine; but he never called it the name in full,
as he had never called the first catherine short: probably because
heathcliff had a habit of doing so.  the little one was always cathy: it
formed to him a distinction from the mother, and yet a connection with
her; and his attachment sprang from its relation to her, far more than
from its being his own.

i used to draw a comparison between him and hindley earnshaw, and perplex
myself to explain satisfactorily why their conduct was so opposite in
similar circumstances.  they had both been fond husbands, and were both
attached to their c
 
 ___________________________
 
you ramble with him, are
much nicer; and thrushcross park is the finest place in the world.'

'but i know the park, and i don't know those,' she murmured to herself.
'and i should delight to look round me from the brow of that tallest
point: my little pony minny shall take me some time.'

one of the maids mentioning the fairy cave, quite turned her head with a
desire to fulfil this project: she teased mr. linton about it; and he
promised she should have the journey when she got older.  but miss
catherine measured her age by months, and, 'now, am i old enough to go to
penistone crags?' was the constant question in her mouth.  the road
thither wound close by wuthering heights.  edgar had not the heart to
pass it; so she received as constantly the answer, 'not yet, love: not
yet.'

i said mrs. heathcliff lived above a dozen years after quitting her
husband.  her family were of a delicate constitution: she and edgar both
lacked the ruddy health that you will generally meet in these parts.  what
her
 
 ___________________________
 
uffered, and entreated him to come to her, if possible;
for she had much to settle, and she wished to bid him adieu, and deliver
linton safely into his hands.  her hope was that linton might be left
with him, as he had been with her: his father, she would fain convince
herself, had no desire to assume the burden of his maintenance or
education.  my master hesitated not a moment in complying with her
request: reluctant as he was to leave home at ordinary calls, he flew to
answer this; commanding catherine to my peculiar vigilance, in his
absence, with reiterated orders that she must not wander out of the park,
even under my escort he did not calculate on her going unaccompanied.

he was away three weeks.  the first day or two my charge sat in a corner
of the library, too sad for either reading or playing: in that quiet
state she caused me little trouble; but it was succeeded by an interval
of impatient, fretful weariness; and being too busy, and too old then, to
run up and down amusing her, i hi
 
 ___________________________
 
 patient
audience of all her real and imaginary adventures when she returned.

the summer shone in full prime; and she took such a taste for this
solitary rambling that she often contrived to remain out from breakfast
till tea; and then the evenings were spent in recounting her fanciful
tales.  i did not fear her breaking bounds; because the gates were
generally locked, and i thought she would scarcely venture forth alone,
if they had stood wide open.  unluckily, my confidence proved misplaced.
catherine came to me, one morning, at eight o'clock, and said she was
that day an arabian merchant, going to cross the desert with his caravan;
and i must give her plenty of provision for herself and beasts: a horse,
and three camels, personated by a large hound and a couple of pointers.  i
got together good store of dainties, and slung them in a basket on one
side of the saddle; and she sprang up as gay as a fairy, sheltered by her
wide-brimmed hat and gauze veil from the july sun, and trotted off with 
 
 ___________________________
 
lied: 'she would have me to cut her a hazel
switch, and then she leapt her galloway over the hedge yonder, where it
is lowest, and galloped out of sight.'

you may guess how i felt at hearing this news.  it struck me directly she
must have started for penistone crags.  'what will become of her?' i
ejaculated, pushing through a gap which the man was repairing, and making
straight to the high-road.  i walked as if for a wager, mile after mile,
till a turn brought me in view of the heights; but no catherine could i
detect, far or near.  the crags lie about a mile and a half beyond mr.
heathcliff's place, and that is four from the grange, so i began to fear
night would fall ere i could reach them.  'and what if she should have
slipped in clambering among them,' i reflected, 'and been killed, or
broken some of her bones?'  my suspense was truly painful; and, at first,
it gave me delightful relief to observe, in hurrying by the farmhouse,
charlie, the fiercest of the pointers, lying under a window, w
 
 ___________________________
 
.  i
silently shook my questioner, and at last succeeded in equipping her for
departure.

'now, get my horse,' she said, addressing her unknown kinsman as she
would one of the stable-boys at the grange.  'and you may come with me.  i
want to see where the goblin-hunter rises in the marsh, and to hear about
the _fairishes_, as you call them: but make haste!  what's the matter?
get my horse, i say.'

'i'll see thee damned before i be _thy_ servant!' growled the lad.

'you'll see me _what_!' asked catherine in surprise.

'damned--thou saucy witch!' he replied.

'there, miss cathy! you see you have got into pretty company,' i
interposed.  'nice words to be used to a young lady!  pray don't begin to
dispute with him.  come, let us seek for minny ourselves, and begone.'

'but, ellen,' cried she, staring fixed in astonishment, 'how dare he
speak so to me?  mustn't he be made to do as i ask him?  you wicked
creature, i shall tell papa what you said.--now, then!'

hareton did not appear to feel this thr
 
 ___________________________
 
d of all
sorts, miss cathy, without being any the worse for it; only they needn't
keep their company, if they be disagreeable and bad.'

'he's not--he's not my cousin, ellen!' she went on, gathering fresh grief
from reflection, and flinging herself into my arms for refuge from the
idea.

i was much vexed at her and the servant for their mutual revelations;
having no doubt of linton's approaching arrival, communicated by the
former, being reported to mr. heathcliff; and feeling as confident that
catherine's first thought on her father's return would be to seek an
explanation of the latter's assertion concerning her rude-bred kindred.
hareton, recovering from his disgust at being taken for a servant, seemed
moved by her distress; and, having fetched the pony round to the door, he
took, to propitiate her, a fine crooked-legged terrier whelp from the
kennel, and putting it into her hand, bid her whist! for he meant nought.
pausing in her lamentations, she surveyed him with a glance of awe and
horro
 
 ___________________________
 
dgment.  he appeared
to have bent his malevolence on making him a brute: he was never taught
to read or write; never rebuked for any bad habit which did not annoy his
keeper; never led a single step towards virtue, or guarded by a single
precept against vice.  and from what i heard, joseph contributed much to
his deterioration, by a narrow-minded partiality which prompted him to
flatter and pet him, as a boy, because he was the head of the old family.
and as he had been in the habit of accusing catherine earnshaw and
heathcliff, when children, of putting the master past his patience, and
compelling him to seek solace in drink by what he termed their 'offald
ways,' so at present he laid the whole burden of hareton's faults on the
shoulders of the usurper of his property.  if the lad swore, he wouldn't
correct him: nor however culpably he behaved.  it gave joseph
satisfaction, apparently, to watch him go the worst lengths: he allowed
that the lad was ruined: that his soul was abandoned to perditi
 
 ___________________________
 
ame limping and hanging their heads; and we set out for
home, sadly out of sorts, every one of us.  i could not wring from my
little lady how she had spent the day; except that, as i supposed, the
goal of her pilgrimage was penistone crags; and she arrived without
adventure to the gate of the farm-house, when hareton happened to issue
forth, attended by some canine followers, who attacked her train.  they
had a smart battle, before their owners could separate them: that formed
an introduction.  catherine told hareton who she was, and where she was
going; and asked him to show her the way: finally, beguiling him to
accompany her.  he opened the mysteries of the fairy cave, and twenty
other queer places.  but, being in disgrace, i was not favoured with a
description of the interesting objects she saw.  i could gather, however,
that her guide had been a favourite till she hurt his feelings by
addressing him as a servant; and heathcliff's housekeeper hurt hers by
calling him her cousin.  then the l
 
 ___________________________
 
 but i insisted most on the
fact, that if she revealed my negligence of his orders, he would perhaps
be so angry that i should have to leave; and cathy couldn't bear that
prospect: she pledged her word, and kept it for my sake.  after all, she
was a sweet little girl.




chapter xix


a letter, edged with black, announced the day of my master's return.
isabella was dead; and he wrote to bid me get mourning for his daughter,
and arrange a room, and other accommodations, for his youthful nephew.
catherine ran wild with joy at the idea of welcoming her father back; and
indulged most sanguine anticipations of the innumerable excellencies of
her 'real' cousin.  the evening of their expected arrival came.  since
early morning she had been busy ordering her own small affairs; and now
attired in her new black frock--poor thing! her aunt's death impressed
her with no definite sorrow--she obliged me, by constant worrying, to
walk with her down through the grounds to meet them.

'linton is just six month
 
 ___________________________
 
and
they walked together up the park, while i hastened before to prepare the
servants.

'now, darling,' said mr. linton, addressing his daughter, as they halted
at the bottom of the front steps: 'your cousin is not so strong or so
merry as you are, and he has lost his mother, remember, a very short time
since; therefore, don't expect him to play and run about with you
directly.  and don't harass him much by talking: let him be quiet this
evening, at least, will you?'

'yes, yes, papa,' answered catherine: 'but i do want to see him; and he
hasn't once looked out.'

the carriage stopped; and the sleeper being roused, was lifted to the
ground by his uncle.

'this is your cousin cathy, linton,' he said, putting their little hands
together.  'she's fond of you already; and mind you don't grieve her by
crying to-night.  try to be cheerful now; the travelling is at an end,
and you have nothing to do but rest and amuse yourself as you please.'

'let me go to bed, then,' answered the boy, shrinking from
 
 ___________________________
 
 catherine's
salute; and he put his fingers to remove incipient tears.

'come, come, there's a good child,' i whispered, leading him in.  'you'll
make her weep too--see how sorry she is for you!'

i do not know whether it was sorrow for him, but his cousin put on as sad
a countenance as himself, and returned to her father.  all three entered,
and mounted to the library, where tea was laid ready.  i proceeded to
remove linton's cap and mantle, and placed him on a chair by the table;
but he was no sooner se
 
 ___________________________
 
all not to-night!' answered linton decisively.  'walk down stairs
at once, and repeat to your master what i have said.  ellen, show him
down.  go--'

and, aiding the indignant elder with a lift by the arm, he rid the room
of him and closed the door.

'varrah weell!' shouted joseph, as he slowly drew off.  'to-morn, he's
come hisseln, and thrust _him_ out, if ye darr!'




chapter xx


to obviate the danger of this threat being fulfilled, mr. linton
commissioned me to take the boy home early, on catherine's pony; and,
said he--'as we shall now have no influence over his destiny, good or
bad, you must say nothing of where he is gone to my daughter: she cannot
associate with him hereafter, and it is better for her to remain in
ignorance of his proximity; lest she should be restless, and anxious to
visit the heights.  merely tell her his father sent for him suddenly, and
he has been obliged to leave us.'

linton was very reluctant to be roused from his bed at five o'clock, and
astonished to be info
 
 ___________________________
 
ed, however, 'if i can get
him'; and there were no hopes of that.  this promise poorly pacified her;
but time was more potent; and though still at intervals she inquired of
her father when linton would return, before she did see him again his
features had waxed so dim in her memory that she did not recognise him.

when i chanced to encounter the housekeeper of wuthering heights, in
paying business visits to gimmerton, i used to ask how the young master
got on; for he lived almost as secluded as catherine herself, and was
never to be seen.  i could gather from her that he continued in weak
health, and was a tiresome inmate.  she said mr. heathcliff seemed to
dislike him ever longer and worse, though he took some trouble to conceal
it: he had an antipathy to the sound of his voice, and could not do at
all with his sitting in the same room with him many minutes together.
there seldom passed much talk between them: linton learnt his lessons and
spent his evenings in a small apartment they called th
 
 ___________________________
 
er he came; and another, whom i did not know, was her successor; she
lives there still.

time wore on at the grange in its former pleasant way till miss cathy
reached sixteen.  on the anniversary of her birth we never manifested any
signs of rejoicing, because it was also the anniversary of my late
mistress's death.  her father invariably spent that day alone in the
library; and walked, at dusk, as far as gimmerton kirkyard, where he
would frequently prolong his stay beyond midnight.  therefore catherine
was thrown on her own resources for amusement.  this twentieth of march
was a beautiful spring day, and when her father had retired, my young
lady came down dressed for going out, and said she asked to have a ramble
on the edge of the moor with me: mr. linton had given her leave, if we
went only a short distance and were back within the hour.

'so make haste, ellen!' she cried.  'i know where i wish to go; where a
colony of moor-game are settled: i want to see whether they have made
their nests
 
 ___________________________
 
ke them; but papa told me there were quantities up here, and i wished
to see the eggs.'

heathcliff glanced at me with an ill-meaning smile, expressing his
acquaintance with the party, and, consequently, his malevolence towards
it, and demanded who 'papa' was?

'mr. linton of thrushcross grange,' she replied.  'i thought you did not
know me, or you wouldn't have spoken in that way.'

'you suppose papa is highly esteemed and respected, then?' he said,
sarcastically.

'and what are you?' inquired catherine, gazing curiously on the speaker.
'that man i've seen before.  is he your son?'

she pointed to hareton, the other individual, who had gained nothing but
increased bulk and strength by the addition of two years to his age: he
seemed as awkward and rough as ever.

'miss cathy,' i interrupted, 'it will be three hours instead of one that
we are out, presently.  we really must go back.'

'no, that man is not my son,' answered heathcliff, pushing me aside.  'but
i have one, and you have seen him bef
 
 ___________________________
 
ore too; and, though your nurse is
in a hurry, i think both you and she would be the better for a little
rest.  will you just turn this nab of heath, and walk into my house?
you'll get home earlier for the ease; and you shall receive a kind
welcome.'

i whispered catherine that she mustn't, on any account, accede to the
proposal: it was entirely out of the question.

'why?' she asked, aloud.  'i'm tired of running, and the ground is dewy:
i can't sit here.  let us go, ellen.  besides, he says i have seen his
son.  he's mistaken, i think; but i guess where he lives: at the
farmhouse i visited in coming from penistone crags.  don't you?'

'i do.  come, nelly, hold your tongue--it will be a treat for her to look
in on us.  hareton, get forwards with the lass.  you s
 
 ___________________________
 
nd i suffered
her to enter your house; and i am convinced you have a bad design in
encouraging her to do so,' i replied.

'my design is as honest as possible.  i'll inform you of its whole
scope,' he said.  'that the two cousins may fall in love, and get
married.  i'm acting generously to your master: his young chit has no
expectations, and should she second my wishes she'll be provided for at
once as joint successor with linton.'

'if linton died,' i answered, 'and his life is quite uncertain, catherine
would be the heir.'

'no, she would not,' he said.  'there is no clause in the will to secure
it so: his property would go to me; but, to prevent disputes, i desire
their union, and am resolved to bring it about.'

'and i'm resolved she shall never approach your house with me again,' i
returned, as we reached the gate, where miss cathy waited our coming.

heathcliff bade me be quiet; and, preceding us up the path, hastened to
open the door.  my young lady gave him several looks, as if she could
 
 ___________________________
 
 yes,' answered he: 'but is this the only time you have beheld him?
think!  ah! you have a short memory.  linton, don't you recall your
cousin, that you used to tease us so with wishing to see?'

'what, linton!' cried cathy, kindling into joyful surprise at the name.
'is that little linton?  he's taller than i am!  are you linton?'

the youth stepped forward, and acknowledged himself: she kissed him
fervently, and they gazed with wonder at the change time had wrought in
the appearance of each.  catherine had reached her full height; her
figure was both plump and slender, elastic as steel, and her whole aspect
sparkling with health and spirits.  linton's looks and movements were
very languid, and his form extremely slight; but there was a grace in his
manner that mitigated these defects, and rendered him not unpleasing.
after exchanging numerous marks of fondness with him, his cousin went to
mr. heathcliff, who lingered by the door, dividing his attention between
the objects inside and those tha
 
 ___________________________
 
g the former alone.

'and you are my uncle, then!' she cried, reaching up to salute him.  'i
thought i liked you, though you were cross at first.  why don't you visit
at the grange with linton?  to live all these years such close
neighbours, and never see us, is odd: what have you done so for?'

'i visited it once or twice too often before you were born,' he answered.
'there--damn it!  if you have any kisses to spare, give them to linton:
they are thrown away on me.'

'naughty ellen!' exclaimed catherine, flying to attack me next with her
lavish caresses.  'wicked ellen! to try to hinder me from entering.  but
i'll take this walk every morning in future: may i, uncle? and sometimes
bring papa.  won't you be glad to see us?'

'of course,' replied the uncle, with a hardly suppressed grimace,
resulting from his deep aversion to both the proposed visitors.  'but
stay,' he continued, turning towards the young lady.  'now i think of it,
i'd better tell you.  mr. linton has a prejudice against me: we

 
 ___________________________
 
quarrelled at one time of our lives, with unchristian ferocity; and, if
you mention coming here to him, he'll put a veto on your visits
altogether.  therefore, you must not mention it, unless you be careless
of seeing your cousin hereafter: you may come, if you will, but you must
not mention it.'

'why did you quarrel?' asked catherine, considerably crestfallen.

'he thought me too poor to wed his sister,' answered heathcliff, 'and was
grieved that i got her: his pride was hurt, and he'll never forgive it.'

'that's wrong!' said the young lady: 'some time i'll tell him so.  but
linton and i have no share in your quarrel.  i'll not come here, then; he
shall come to the grange.'

'it will be too far for me,' murmured her cousin: 'to walk four miles
would kill me.  no, come here, miss catherine, now and then: not every
morning, 
 
 ___________________________
 
but once or twice a week.'

the father launched towards his son a glance of bitter contempt.

'i am afraid, nelly, i shall lose my labour,' he muttered to me.  'miss
catherine, as the ninny calls her, will discover his value, and send him
to the devil.  now, if it had been hareton!--do you know that, twenty
times a day, i covet hareton, with all his degradation?  i'd have loved
the lad had he been some one else.  but i think he's safe from _her_
love.  i'll pit him against that paltry creature, unless it bestir itself
briskly.  we calculate it will scarcely last till it is eighteen.  oh,
confound the vapid thing!  he's absorbed in drying his feet, and never
looks at 
 
 ___________________________
 
ve.

he kept his seat, and shrank closer to the fire.  heathcliff rose, and
went into the kitchen, and from thence to the yard, calling out for
hareton.  hareton responded, and presently the two re-entered.  the young
man had been washing himself, as was visible by the glow on his cheeks
and his wetted hair.

'oh, i'll ask _you_, uncle,' cried miss cathy, recollecting the
housekeeper's assertion.  'that is not my cousin, is he?'

'yes,' he, replied, 'your mother's nephew.  don't you like him!'

catherine looked queer.

'is he not a handsome lad?' he continued.

the uncivil little thing stood on tiptoe, and whispered a sentence in
heathcliff's ear.  he laughed; hareton darkened: i perceived he was very
sensitive to suspected slights, and had obviously a dim notion of his
inferiority.  but his master or guardian chased the frown by exclaiming--

'you'll be the favourite among us, hareton!  she says you are a--what was
it?  well, something very flattering.  here! you go with her round the
farm.  a
 
 ___________________________
 
 behave like a gentleman, mind!  don't use any bad words; and
don't stare when the young lady is not looking at you, and be ready to
hide your face when she is; and, when you speak, say your words slowly,
and keep your hands out of your pockets.  be off, and entertain her as
nicely as you can.'

he watched the couple walking past the window.  earnshaw had his
countenance completely averted from his companion.  he seemed studying
the familiar landscape with a stranger's and an artist's interest.
catherine took a sly look at him, expressing small admiration.  she then
turned her attention to seeking out objects of amusement for herself, and
tripped merrily on, lilting a tune to supply the lack of conversation.

'i've tied his tongue,' observed heathcliff.  'he'll not venture a single
syllable all the time!  nelly, you recollect me at his age--nay, some
years younger.  did i ever look so stupid: so "gaumless," as joseph calls
it?'

'worse,' i replied, 'because more sullen with it.'

'i've a pleasu
 
 ___________________________
 
 rise from
his grave to abuse me for his offspring's wrongs, i should have the fun
of seeing the said offspring fight him back again, indignant that he
should dare to rail at the one friend he has in the world!'

heathcliff chuckled a fiendish laugh at the idea.  i made no reply,
because i saw that he expected none.  meantime, our young companion, who
sat too removed from us to hear what was said, began to evince symptoms
of uneasiness, probably repenting that he had denied himself the treat of
catherine's society for fear of a little fatigue.  his father remarked
the restless glances wandering to the window, and the hand irresolutely
extended towards his cap.

'get up, you idle boy!' he exclaimed, with assumed heartiness.

'away after them! they are just at the corner, by the stand of hives.'

linton gathered his energies, and left the hearth.  the lattice was open,
and, as he stepped out, i heard cathy inquiring of her unsociable
attendant what was that inscription over the door? hareton star
 
 ___________________________
 
ed up, and
scratched his head like a true clown.

'it's some damnable writing,' he answered.  'i cannot read it.'

'can't read it?' cried catherine; 'i can read it: it's english.  but i
want to know why it is there.'

linton giggled: the first appearance of mirth he had exhibited.

'he does not know his letters,' he said to his cousin.  'could you
believe in the existence of such a colossal dunce?'

'is he all as he should be?' asked miss cathy, seriously; 'or is he
simple: not right?  i've questioned him twice now, and each time he
looked so stupid i think he does not understand me.  i can hardly
understand him, i'm sure!'

linton repeate
 
 ___________________________
 
d his laugh, and glanced at hareton tauntingly; who
certainly did not seem quite clear of comprehension at that moment.

'there's nothing the matter but laziness; is there, earnshaw?' he said.
'my cousin fancies you are an idiot.  there you experience the
consequence of scorning "book-larning," as you would say.  have you
noticed, catherine, his frightful yorkshire pronunciation?'

'why, where the devil is the use on't?' growled hareton, more ready in
answering his daily companion.  he was about to enlarge further, but the
two youngsters broke into a noisy fit of merriment: my giddy miss being
delighted to discover that she might turn his strange talk to matter of
amusement.

'where is the use of the devil in that sentence?' tittered linton.  'papa
told you not to say any bad words, and you can't open your mouth without
one.  do t
 
 ___________________________
 
elling with
him.'

and so she ran on, till i relinquished the endeavour to convince her of
her mistake.  she did not mention the visit that night, because she did
not see mr. linton.  next day it all came out, sadly to my chagrin; and
still i was not altogether sorry: i thought the burden of directing and
warning would be more efficiently borne by him than me.  but he was too
timid in giving satisfactory reasons for his wish that she should shun
connection with the household of the heights, and catherine liked good
reasons for every restraint that harassed her petted will.

'papa!' she exclaimed, after the morning's salutations, 'guess whom i saw
yesterday, in my walk on the moors.  ah, papa, you started! you've not
done right, have you, now?  i saw--but listen, and you shall hear how i
found you out; and ellen, who is in league with you, and yet pretended to
pity me so, when i kept hoping, and was always disappointed about
linton's coming back!'

she gave a faithful account of her excursion an
 
 ___________________________
 
diabolical man, delighting to wrong
and ruin those he hates, if they give him the slightest opportunity.  i
knew that you could not keep up an acquaintance with your cousin without
being brought into contact with him; and i knew he would detest you on my
account; so for your own good, and nothing else, i took precautions that
you should not see linton again.  i meant to explain this some time as
you grew older, and i'm sorry i delayed it.'

'but mr. heathcliff was quite cordial, papa,' observed catherine, not at
all convinced; 'and he didn't object to our seeing each other: he said i
might come to his house when i pleased; only i must not tell you, because
you had quarrelled with him, and would not forgive him for marrying aunt
isabella.  and you won't.  _you_ are the one to be blamed: he is willing
to let us be friends, at least; linton and i; and you are not.'

my master, perceiving that she would not take his word for her
uncle-in-law's evil disposition, gave a hasty sketch of his conduct to
 
 ___________________________
 
it that could brood on and cover revenge
for years, and deliberately prosecute its plans without a visitation of
remorse. she appeared so deeply impressed and shocked at this new view
of human nature--excluded from all her studies and all her ideas till
now--that mr. edgar deemed it unnecessary to pursue the subject. he
merely added: 'you will know hereafter, darling, why i wish you to avoid
his house and family; now return to your old employments and amusements,
and think no more about them.'

catherine kissed her father, and sat down quietly to her lessons for a
couple of hours, according to custom; then she accompanied him into the
grounds, and the whole day passed as usual: but in the evening, when she
had retired to her room, and i went to help her to undress, i found her
crying, on her knees by the bedside.

'oh, fie, silly child!' i exclaimed.  'if you had any real griefs you'd
be ashamed to waste a tear on this little contrariety.  you never had one
shadow of substantial sorrow, miss ca
 
 ___________________________
 
wo
afternoons.  linton will conjecture how it is, and trouble himself no
further about you.'

'but may i not write a note to tell him why i cannot come?' she asked,
rising to her feet.  'and just send those books i promised to lend him?
his books are not as nice as mine, and he wanted to have them extremely,
when i told him how interesting they were.  may i not, ellen?'

'no, indeed! no, indeed!' replied i with decision.  'then he would write
to you, and there'd never be an end of it.  no, miss catherine, the
acquaintance must be dropped entirely: so papa expects, and i shall see
that it is done.'

'but how can one little note--?' she recommenced, putting on an imploring
countenance.

'silence!' i interrupted.  'we'll not begin with your little notes.  get
into bed.'

she threw at me a very naughty look, so naughty that i would not kiss her
good-night at first: i covered her up, and shut her door, in great
displeasure; but, repenting half-way, i returned softly, and lo! there
was miss standing 
 
 ___________________________
 
at the table with a bit of blank paper before her and a
pencil in her hand, which she guiltily slipped out of sight on my
entrance.

'you'll get nobody to take that, catherine,' i said, 'if you write it;
and at present i shall put out your candle.'

i set the extinguisher on the flame, receiving as i did so a slap on my
hand and a petulant 'cross thing!'  i then quitted her again, and she
drew the bolt in one of her worst, most peevish humours.  the letter was
finished and forwarded to its destination by a milk-fetcher who came from
the village; but that i didn't learn till some time afterwards.  weeks
passed on, and cathy recovered her temper; though she grew wondro
 
 ___________________________
 
.

'no, papa!' she gasped.  'ellen! ellen! come up-stairs--i'm sick!'

i obeyed her summons, and accompanied her out.

'oh, ellen! you have got them,' she commenced immediately, dropping on
her knees, when we were enclosed alone.  'oh, give them to me, and i'll
never, never do so again!  don't tell papa.  you have not told papa,
ellen? say you have not?  i've been exceedingly naughty, but i won't do
it any more!'

with a grave severity in my manner i bade her stand up.

'so,' i exclaimed, 'miss catherine, you are tolerably far on, it seems:
you may well be ashamed of them!  a fine bundle of trash you study in
your leisure hours, to be sure: why, it's good enough to be printed!  and
what do you suppose the master will think when i display it before him?  i
hav'n't shown it yet, but you needn't imagine i shall keep your
ridiculous secrets.  for shame! and you must have led the way in writing
such absurdities: he would not have thought of beginning, i'm certain.'

'i didn't!  i didn't!' sobbed cat
 
 ___________________________
 
 my head; and
then she poured out further frantic entreaties that i would burn them--do
anything rather than show them.  and being really fully as much inclined
to laugh as scold--for i esteemed it all girlish vanity--i at length
relented in a measure, and asked,--'if i consent to burn them, will you
promise faithfully neither to send nor receive a letter again, nor a book
(for i perceive you have sent him books), nor locks of hair, nor rings,
nor playthings?'

'we don't send playthings,' cried catherine, her pride overcoming her
shame.

'nor anything at all, then, my lady?' i said.  'unless you will, here i
go.'

'i promise, ellen!' she cried, catching my dress.  'oh, put them in the
fire, do, do!'

but when i proceeded to open a place with the poker the sacrifice was too
painful to be borne.  she earnestly supplicated that i would spare her
one or two.

'one or two, ellen, to keep for linton's sake!'

i unknotted the handkerchief, and commenced dropping them in from an
angle, and the flame cu
 
 ___________________________
 
ere was no running or bounding now, though the chill wind might
well have tempted her to race.  and often, from the side of my eye, i
could detect her raising a hand, and brushing something off her cheek.  i
gazed round for a means of diverting her thoughts.  on one side of the
road rose a high, rough bank, where hazels and stunted oaks, with their
roots half exposed, held uncertain tenure: the soil was too loose for the
latter; and strong winds had blown some nearly horizontal.  in summer
miss catherine delighted to climb along these trunks, and sit in the
branches, swinging twenty feet above the ground; and i, pleased with her
agility and her light, childish heart, still considered it proper to
scold every time i caught her at such an elevation, but so that she knew
there was no necessity for descending.  from dinner to tea she would lie
in her breeze-rocked cradle, doing nothing except singing old songs--my
nursery lore--to herself, or watching the birds, joint tenants, feed and
entice their
 
 ___________________________
 
 not
touch it: but it looks melancholy, does it not, ellen?'

'yes,' i observed, 'about as starved and suckless as you: your cheeks are
bloodless; let us take hold of hands and run.  you're so low, i daresay i
shall keep up with you.'

'no,' she repeated, and continued sauntering on, pausing at intervals to
muse over a bit of moss, or a tuft of blanched grass, or a fungus
spreading its bright orange among the heaps of brown foliage; and, ever
and anon, her hand was lifted to her averted face.

'catherine, why are you crying, love?' i asked, approaching and putting
my arm over her shoulder.  'you mustn't cry because papa has a cold; be
thankful it is nothing worse.'

she now put no further restraint on her tears; her breath was stifled by
sobs.

'oh, it will be something worse,' she said.  'and what shall i do when
papa and you leave me, and i am by myself?  i can't forget your words,
ellen; they are always in my ear.  how life will be changed, how dreary
the world will be, when papa and you are
 
 ___________________________
 
rn was no such easy
matter: the stones were smooth and neatly cemented, and the rose-bushes
and black-berry stragglers could yield no assistance in re-ascending.  i,
like a fool, didn't recollect that, till i heard her laughing and
exclaiming--'ellen! you'll have to fetch the key, or else i must run
round to the porter's lodge.  i can't scale the ramparts on this side!'

'stay where you are,' i answered; 'i have my bundle of keys in my pocket:
perhaps i may manage to open it; if not, i'll go.'

catherine amused herself with dancing to and fro before the door, while i
tried all the large keys in succession.  i had applied the last, and
found that none would do; so, repeating my desire that she would remain
there, i was about to hurry home as fast as i could, when an approaching
sound arrested me.  it was the trot of a horse; cathy's dance stopped
also.

'who is that?' i whispered.

'ellen, i wish you could open the door,' whispered back my companion,
anxiously.

'ho, miss linton!' cried a deep v
 
 ___________________________
 
oice (the rider's), 'i'm glad to meet
you.  don't be in haste to enter, for i have an explanation to ask and
obtain.'

'i sha'n't speak to you, mr. heathcliff,' answered catherine.  'papa says
you are a wicked man, and you hate both him and me; and ellen says the
same.'

'that is nothing to the purpose,' said heathcliff.  (he it was.)  'i
don't hate my son, i suppose; and it is concerning him that i demand your
attention.  yes; you have cause to blush.  two or three months since,
were you not in the habit of writing to linton? making love in play, eh?
you deserved, both of you, flogging for that!  you especially, the elder;
and less sensitive, as it turns out.  i've got 
 
 ___________________________
 
 paltry
falsehoods?  miss cathy, i'll knock the lock off with a stone: you won't
believe that vile nonsense.  you can feel in yourself it is impossible
that a person should die for love of a stranger.'

'i was not aware there were eavesdroppers,' muttered the detected
villain. 'worthy mrs. dean, i like you, but i don't like your
double-dealing,' he added aloud. 'how could _you_ lie so glaringly as to
affirm i hated the "poor child"? and invent bugbear stories to terrify
her from my door-stones? catherine linton (the very name warms me), my
bonny lass, i shall be from home all this week; go and see if have not
spoken truth: do, there's a darling! just imagine your father in my
place, and linton in yours; then think how you would value your careless
lover if he refused to stir a step to comfort you, when your father
himself entreated him; and don't, from pure stupidity, fall into the
same error. i swear, on my salvation, he's going to his grave, and none
but you can save him!'

the lock gave way 
 
 ___________________________
 

grief and disappointment are hastening his death.  nelly, if you won't
let her go, you can walk over yourself.  but i shall not return till this
time next week; and i think your master himself would scarcely object to
her visiting her cousin.'

'come in,' said i, taking cathy by the arm and half forcing her to
re-enter; for she lingered, viewing with troubled eyes the features of
the speaker, too stern to express his inward deceit.

he pushed his horse close, and, bending down, observed--'miss catherine,
i'll own to you that i have little patience with linton; and hareton and
joseph have less.  i'll own that he's with a harsh set.  he pines for
kindness, as well as love; and a kind word from you would be his best
medicine.  don't mind mrs. dean's cruel cautions; but be generous, and
contrive to see him.  he dreams of you day and night, and cannot be
persuaded that you don't hate him, since you neither write nor call.'

i closed the door, and rolled a stone to assist the loosened lock in
holdin
 
 ___________________________
 
g it; and spreading my umbrella, i drew my charge underneath: for
the rain began to drive through the moaning branches of the trees, and
warned us to avoid delay.  our hurry prevented any comment on the
encounter with heathcliff, as we stretched towards home; but i divined
instinctively that catherine's heart was clouded now in double darkness.
her features were so sad, they did not seem hers: she evidently regarded
what she had heard as every syllable true.

the master had retired to rest before we came in.  cathy stole to his
room to inquire how he was; he had fallen asleep.  she returned, and
asked me to sit with her in the library.  we took our tea together; and
afterwards she lay down on the rug, and told me not to talk, for she was
weary.  i got a book, and pretended to read.  as soon 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
uplands.  my feet were thoroughly wetted; i was cross and low; exactly
the humour suited for making the most of these disagreeable things.  we
entered the farm-house by the kitchen way, to ascertain whether mr.
heathcliff were really absent: because i put slight faith in his own
affirmation.

joseph seemed sitting in a sort of elysium alone, beside a roaring fire;
a quart of ale on the table near him, bristling with large pieces of
toasted oat-cake; and his black, short pipe in his mouth.  catherine ran
to the hearth to warm herself.  i asked if the master was in?  my
question remained so long unanswered, that i thought the old man had
grown deaf, and repeated it louder.

'na--ay!' he snarled, or rather screamed through his nose.  'na--ay! yah
muh goa back whear yah coom frough.'

'joseph!' cried a peevish voice, simultaneously with me, from the inner
room.  'how often am i to call you?  there are only a few red ashes now.
joseph! come this moment.'

vigorous puffs, and a resolute stare in
 
 ___________________________
 
 and the other at his work, probably.  we knew linton's
tones, and entered.

'oh, i hope you'll die in a garret, starved to death!' said the boy,
mistaking our approach for that of his negligent attendant.

he stopped on observing his error: his cousin flew to him.

'is that you, miss linton?' he said, raising his head from the arm of the
great chair, in which he reclined.  'no--don't kiss me: it takes my
breath.  dear me!  papa said you would call,' continued he, after
recovering a little from catherine's embrace; while she stood by looking
very contrite.  'will you shut the door, if you please? you left it open;
and those--those _detestable_ creatures won't bring coals to the fire.
it's so cold!'

i stirred up the cinders, and fetched a scuttleful myself.  the invalid
complained of being covered with ashes; but he had a tiresome cough, and
looked feverish and ill, so i did not rebuke his temper.

'well, linton,' murmured catherine, when his corrugated brow relaxed,
'are you glad to see me?  c
 
 ___________________________
 
  will you' (looking at me) 'step into
the kitchen and see?'

i had received no thanks for my other service; and being unwilling to run
to and fro at his behest, i replied--'nobody is out there but joseph.'

'i want to drink,' he exclaimed fretfully, turning away.  'zillah is
constantly gadding off to gimmerton since papa went: it's miserable!  and
i'm obliged to come down here--they resolved never to hear me up-stairs.'

'is your father attentive to you, master heathcliff?' i asked, perceiving
catherine to be checked in her friendly advances.

'attentive?  he makes them a little more attentive at least,' he cried.
'the wretches!  do you know, miss linton, that brute hareton laughs at
me!  i hate him! indeed, i hate them all: they are odious beings.'

cathy began searching for some water; she lighted on a pitcher in the
dresser, filled a tumbler, and brought it.  he bid her add a spoonful of
wine from a bottle on the table; and having swallowed a small portion,
appeared more tranquil, and said 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed she, reiterating her former question
and pleased to detect the faint dawn of a smile.

'yes, i am.  it's something new to hear a voice like yours!' he replied.
'but i have been vexed, because you wouldn't come.  and papa swore it was
owing to me: he called me a pitiful, shuffling, worthless thing; and said
you despised me; and if he had been in my place, he would be more the
master of the grange than your father by this time.  but you don't
despise me, do you, miss--?'

'i wish you would say catherine, or cathy,' interrupted my young lady.
'despise you?  no!  next to papa and ellen, i love you better than
anybody living.  i don't love mr. heathcliff, though; and i dare not come
when he returns: will he stay away many days?'

'not many,' answered linton; 'but he goes on to the moors frequently,
since the shooting season commenced; and you might spend an hour or two
with me in his absence.  do say you will.  i think i should not be
peevish with you: you'd not provoke me, and you'd always be re
 
 ___________________________
 
ady to help
me, wouldn't you?'

'yes,' said catherine, stroking his long soft hair: 'if i could only get
papa's consent, i'd spend half my time with you.  pretty linton!  i wish
you were my brother.'

'and then you would like me as well as your father?' observed he, more
cheerfully.  'but papa says you would love me better than him and all the
world, if you were my wife; so i'd rather you were that.'

'no, i should never love anybody better than papa,' she returned gravely.
'and people hate their wives, sometimes; but not their sisters and
brother
 
 ___________________________
 

linton denied that people ever hated their wives; but cathy affirmed they
did, and, in her wisdom, instanced his own father's aversion to her aunt.
i endeavoured to stop her thoughtless tongue.  i couldn't succeed till
everything she knew was out.  master heathcliff, much irritated, asserted
her relation was false.

'papa told me; and papa does not tell falsehoods,' she answered pertly.

'_my_ papa scorns yours!' cried linton.  'he calls him a sneaking fool.'

'yours is a wicked man,' retorted catherine; 'and you are very naughty to
dare to repeat what he says.  he must be wicked to have made aunt
isabella leave him as she did.'

'she didn't leave him,' said the boy; 'you sha'n't contradict me.'

'she did,' cried my young lady.

'well, i'll tell you something!' said linton.  'your mother hated your
father: now then.'

'oh!' exclaimed catherine, too enraged to continue.

'and she loved mine,' added he.

'you little liar!  i hate you now!' she panted, and her face grew red
with passion.

'she di
 
 ___________________________
 
d! she did!' sang linton, sinking into the recess of his chair,
and leaning back his head to enjoy the agitation of the other disputant,
who stood behind.

'hush, master heathcliff!' i said; 'that's your father's tale, too, i
suppose.'

'it isn't: you hold your tongue!' he answered.  'she did, she did,
catherine! she did, she did!'

cathy, beside herself, gave the chair a violent push, and caused him to
fall against one arm.  he was immediately seized by a suffocating cough
that soon ended his triumph.  it lasted so long that it frightened even
me.  as to his cousin, she wept with all her might, aghast at the
mischief she had done: though she said nothing.  i held him till the fit
exhausted itself.  then he thrust me away, and leant his head down
silently.  catherine quelled her lamentations also, took
 
 ___________________________
 
h this cough.  if you had it you'd know what
it was; but _you'll_ be comfortably asleep while i'm in agony, and nobody
near me.  i wonder how you would like to pass those fearful nights!'  and
he began to wail aloud, for very pity of himself.

'since you are in the habit of passing dreadful nights,' i said, 'it
won't be miss who spoils your ease: you'd be the same had she never come.
however, she shall not disturb you again; and perhaps you'll get quieter
when we leave you.'

'must i go?' asked catherine dolefully, bending over him.  'do you want
me to go, linton?'

'you can't alter what you've done,' he replied pettishly, shrinking from
her, 'unless you alter it for the worse by teasing me into a fever.'

'well, then, i must go?' she repeated.

'let me alone, at least,' said he; 'i can't bear your talking.'

she lingered, and resisted my persuasions to departure a tiresome while;
but as he neither looked up nor spoke, she finally made a movement to the
door, and i followed.  we were recalled b
 
 ___________________________
 
not the person to benefit him; and that his condition
of health is not occasioned by attachment to you.  now, then, there he
is!  come away: as soon as he knows there is nobody by to care for his
nonsense, he'll be glad to lie still.'

she placed a cushion under his head, and offered him some water; he
rejected the latter, and tossed uneasily on the former, as if it were a
stone or a block of wood.  she tried to put it more comfortably.

'i can't do with that,' he said; 'it's not high enough.'

catherine brought another to lay above it.

'that's too high,' murmured the provoking thing.

'how must i arrange it, then?' she asked despairingly.

he twined himself up to her, as she half knelt by the settle, and
converted her shoulder into a support.

'no, that won't do,' i said.  'you'll be content with the cushion, master
heathcliff.  miss has wasted too much time on you already: we cannot
remain five minutes longer.'

'yes, yes, we can!' replied cathy.  'he's good and patient now.  he's
beginning 
 
 ___________________________
 
didn't
do it all,' said his cousin.  'however, we'll be friends now.  and you
want me: you would wish to see me sometimes, really?'

'i told you i did,' he replied impatiently.  'sit on the settle and let
me lean on your knee.  that's as mamma used to do, whole afternoons
together.  sit quite still and don't talk: but you may sing a song, if
you can sing; or you may say a nice long interesting ballad--one of those
you promised to teach me; or a story.  i'd rather have a ballad, though:
begin.'

catherine repeated the longest she could remember.  the employment
pleased both mightily.  linton would have another, and after that
another, notwithstanding my strenuous objections; and so they went on
until the clock struck twelve, and we heard hareton in the court,
returning for his dinner.

'and to-morrow, catherine, will you be here to-morrow?' asked young
heathcliff, holding her frock as she rose reluctantly.

'no,' i answered, 'nor next day neither.'  she, however, gave a different
response eviden
 
 ___________________________
 
r we were used to each other?  don't you like him, ellen?'

'like him!' i exclaimed.  'the worst-tempered bit of a sickly slip that
ever struggled into its teens.  happily, as mr. heathcliff conjectured,
he'll not win twenty.  i doubt whether he'll see spring, indeed.  and
small loss to his family whenever he drops off.  and lucky it is for us
that his father took him: the kinder he was treated, the more tedious and
selfish he'd be.  i'm glad you have no chance of having him for a
husband, miss catherine.'

my companion waxed serious at hearing this speech.  to speak of his death
so regardlessly wounded her feelings.

'he's younger than i,' she answered, after a protracted pause of
meditation, 'and he ought to live the longest: he will--he must live as
long as i do.  he's as strong now as when he first came into the north;
i'm positive of that.  it's only a cold that ails him, the same as papa
has.  you say papa will get better, and why shouldn't he?'

'well, well,' i cried, 'after all, we need
 
 ___________________________
 
while at the heights had done the
mischief.  on the succeeding morning i was laid up, and during three
weeks i remained incapacitated for attending to my duties: a calamity
never experienced prior to that period, and never, i am thankful to say,
since.

my little mistress behaved like an angel in coming to wait on me, and
cheer my solitude; the confinement brought me exceedingly low.  it is
wearisome, to a stirring active body: but few have slighter reasons for
complaint than i had.  the moment catherine left mr. linton's room she
appeared at my bedside.  her day was divided between us; no amusement
usurped a minute: she neglected her meals, her studies, and her play; and
she was the fondest nurse that ever watched.  she must have had a warm
heart, when she loved her father so, to give so much to me.  i said her
days were divided between us; but the master retired early, and i
generally needed nothing after six o'clock, thus the evening was her own.
poor thing!  i never considered what she did 
 
 ___________________________
 
with herself after tea.  and
though frequently, when she looked in to bid me good-night, i remarked a
fresh colour in her cheeks and a pinkness over her slender fingers,
instead of fancying the line borrowed from a cold ride across the moors,
i laid it to the charge of a hot fire in the library.




chapter xxiv


at the close of three weeks i was able to quit my chamber and move about
the house.  and on the first occasion of my sitting up in the evening i
asked catherine to read to me, because my eyes were weak.  we were in the
library, the master having gone to bed: she consented, rather
unwillingly, i fancied; and imagining my sort of books did not suit her,
i bid her please herself in the choice of what she perused.  she selected
one of her own favourites, and got forward steadily about an hour; then
came frequent questions.

'ellen, are not you tired?  hadn't you better lie down now?  you'll be
sick, keeping up so long, ellen.'

'no, no, dear, i'm not tired
 
 ___________________________
 
and finally went to her room, completely overdone with sleep;
judging by her peevish, heavy look, and the constant rubbing she
inflicted on her eyes.  the following night she seemed more impatient
still; and on the third from recovering my company she complained of a
headache, and left me.  i thought her conduct odd; and having remained
alone a long while, i resolved on going and inquiring whether she were
better, and asking her to come and lie on the sofa, instead of up-stairs
in the dark.  no catherine could i discover up-stairs, and none below.
the servants affirmed they had not seen her.  i listened at mr. edgar's
door; all was silence.  i returned to her apartment, extinguished my
candle, and seated myself in the window.

the moon shone bright; a sprinkling of snow covered the ground, and i
reflected that she might, possibly, have taken it into her head to walk
about the garden, for refreshment.  i did detect a figure creeping along
the inner fence of the park; but it was not my young mist
 
 ___________________________
 
 by its side.  the man took his charge stealthily
across the grass towards the stable.  cathy entered by the
casement-window of the drawing-room, and glided noiselessly up to where i
awaited her.  she put the door gently too, slipped off her snowy shoes,
untied her hat, and was proceeding, unconscious of my espionage, to lay
aside her mantle, when i suddenly rose and revealed myself.  the surprise
petrified her an instant: she uttered an inarticulate exclamation, and
stood fixed.

'my dear miss catherine,' i began, too vividly impressed by her recent
kindness to break into a scold, 'where have you been riding out at this
hour?  and why should you try to deceive me by telling a tale?  where
have you been?  speak!'

'to the bottom of the park,' she stammered.  'i didn't tell a tale.'

'and nowhere else?' i demanded.

'no,' was the muttered reply.

'oh, catherine!' i cried, sorrowfully.  'you know you have been doing
wrong, or you wouldn't be driven to uttering an untruth to me.  that does
grieve 
 
 ___________________________
 
thought how nice it would be to play in, if we
removed the table; and i asked linton to call zillah in to help us, and
we'd have a game at blindman's-buff; she should try to catch us: you used
to, you know, ellen.  he wouldn't: there was no pleasure in it, he said;
but he consented to play at ball with me.  we found two in a cupboard,
among a heap of old toys, tops, and hoops, and battledores and
shuttlecocks.  one was marked c., and the other h.; i wished to have the
c., because that stood for catherine, and the h. might be for heathcliff,
his name; but the bran came out of h., and linton didn't like it.  i beat
him constantly: and he got cross again, and coughed, and returned to his
chair.  that night, though, he easily recovered his good humour: he was
charmed with two or three pretty songs--_your_ songs, ellen; and when i
was obliged to go, he begged and entreated me to come the following
evening; and i promised.  minny and i went flying home as light as air;
and i dreamt of wuthering heigh
 
 ___________________________
 
ce.  he patted minny's neck,
and said she was a bonny beast, and appeared as if he wanted me to speak
to him.  i only told him to leave my horse alone, or else it would kick
him.  he answered in his vulgar accent, "it wouldn't do mitch hurt if it
did;" and surveyed its legs with a smile.  i was half inclined to make it
try; however, he moved off to open the door, and, as he raised the latch,
he looked up to the inscription above, and said, with a stupid mixture of
awkwardness and elation: "miss catherine!  i can read yon, now."

'"wonderful," i exclaimed.  "pray let us hear you--you _are_ grown
clever!"

'he spelt, and drawled over by syllables, the name--"hareton earnshaw."

'"and the figures?" i cried, encouragingly, perceiving that he came to a
dead halt.

'"i cannot tell them yet," he answered.

'"oh, you dunce!" i said, laughing heartily at his failure.

'the fool stared, with a grin hovering about his lips, and a scowl
gathering over his eyes, as if uncertain whether he might not join in 
 
 ___________________________
 
hether it were not pleasant familiarity, or what it really was,
contempt.  i settled his doubts, by suddenly retrieving my gravity and
desiring him to walk away, for i came to see linton, not him.  he
reddened--i saw that by the moonlight--dropped his hand from the latch,
and skulked off, a picture of mortified vanity.  he imagined himself to
be as accomplished as linton, i suppose, because he could spell his own
name; and was marvellously discomfited that i didn't think the same.'

'stop, miss catherine, dear!'--i interrupted.  'i shall not scold, but i
don't like your conduct there.  if you had remembered that hareton was
your cousin as much as master heathcliff, you would have felt how
improper it was to behave in that way.  at least, it was praiseworthy
ambition for him to desire to be as accomplished as linton; and probably
he did not learn merely to show off: you had made him ashamed of his
ignorance before, i have no doubt; and he wished to remedy it and please
you.  to sneer at his impe
 
 ___________________________
 
ould you be less rude?  he was as
quick and as intelligent a child as ever you were; and i'm hurt that he
should be despised now, because that base heathcliff has treated him so
unjustly.'

'well, ellen, you won't cry about it, will you?' she exclaimed, surprised
at my earnestness.  'but wait, and you shall hear if he conned his a b c
to please me; and if it were worth while being civil to the brute.  i
entered; linton was lying on the settle, and half got up to welcome me.

'"i'm ill to-night, catherine, love," he said; "and you must have all the
talk, and let me listen.  come, and sit by me.  i was sure you wouldn't
break your word, and i'll make you promise again, before you go."

'i knew now that i mustn't tease him, as he was ill; and i spoke softly
and put no questions, and avoided irritating him in any way.  i had
brought some of my nicest books for him: he asked me to read a little of
one, and i was about to comply, when earnshaw burst the door open: having
gathered venom with reflectio
 
 ___________________________
 
suming every now and then to bid me "wisht," and
denying that it was his fault; and, finally, frightened by my assertions
that i would tell papa, and that he should be put in prison and hanged,
he commenced blubbering himself, and hurried out to hide his cowardly
agitation.  still, i was not rid of him: when at length they compelled me
to depart, and i had got some hundred yards off the premises, he suddenly
issued from the shadow of the road-side, and checked minny and took hold
of me.

'"miss catherine, i'm ill grieved," he began, "but it's rayther too bad--"

'i gave him a cut with my whip, thinking perhaps he would murder me.  he
let go, thundering one of his horrid curses, and i galloped home more
than half out of my senses.

'i didn't bid you good-night that evening, and i didn't go to wuthering
heights the next: i wished to go exceedingly; but i was strangely
excited, and dreaded to hear that linton was dead, sometimes; and
sometimes shuddered at the thought of encountering hareton.  on 
 
 ___________________________
 
into a small, tidy,
carpeted apartment, where, to my inexpressible joy, i beheld linton laid
on a little sofa, reading one of my books.  but he would neither speak to
me nor look at me, through a whole hour, ellen: he has such an unhappy
temper.  and what quite confounded me, when he did open his mouth, it was
to utter the falsehood that i had occasioned the uproar, and hareton was
not to blame!  unable to reply, except passionately, i got up and walked
from the room.  he sent after me a faint "catherine!"  he did not reckon
on being answered so: but i wouldn't turn back; and the morrow was the
second day on which i stayed at home, nearly determined to visit him no
more.  but it was so miserable going to bed and getting up, and never
hearing anything about him, that my resolution melted into air before it
was properly formed.  it had appeared wrong to take the journey once; now
it seemed wrong to refrain.  michael came to ask if he must saddle minny;
i said "yes," and considered myself doing a 
 
 ___________________________
 
as there also, but he quitted the room
directly.  linton sat in the great arm-chair half asleep; walking up to
the fire, i began in a serious tone, partly meaning it to be true--

'"as you don't like me, linton, and as you think i come on purpose to
hurt you, and pretend that i do so every time, this is our last meeting:
let us say good-bye; and tell mr. heathcliff that you have no wish to see
me, and that he mustn't invent any more falsehoods on the subject."

'"sit down and take your hat off, catherine," he answered.  "you are so
much happier than i am, you ought to be better.  papa talks enough of my
defects, and shows enough scorn of me, to make it natural i should doubt
myself.  i doubt whether i am not altogether as worthless as he calls me,
frequently; and then i feel so cross and bitter, i hate everybody!  i am
worthless, and bad in temper, and bad in spirit, almost always; and, if
you choose, you may say good-bye: you'll get rid of an annoyance.  only,
catherine, do me this justice: be
 
 ___________________________
 
o.  he
burst into a laugh, and went away, saying he was glad i took that view of
the matter.  since then, i've told linton he must whisper his bitter
things.  now, ellen, you have heard all.  i can't be prevented from going
to wuthering heights, except by inflicting misery on two people; whereas,
if you'll only not tell papa, my going need disturb the tranquillity of
none.  you'll not tell, will you?  it will be very heartless, if you do.'

'i'll make up my mind on that point by to-morrow, miss catherine,' i
replied.  'it requires some study; and so i'll leave you to your rest,
and go think it over.'

i thought it over aloud, in my master's presence; walking straight from
her room to his, and relating the whole story: with the exception of her
conversations with her cousin, and any mention of hareton.  mr. linton
was alarmed and distressed, more than he would acknowledge to me.  in the
morning, catherine learnt my betrayal of her confidence, and she learnt
also that her secret visits were to en
 
 ___________________________
 
d.  in vain she wept and writhed
against the interdict, and implored her father to have pity on linton:
all she got to comfort her was a promise that he would write and give him
leave to come to the grange when he pleased; but explaining that he must
no longer expect to see catherine at wuthering heights.  perhaps, had he
been aware of his nephew's disposition and state of health, he would have
seen fit to withhold even that slight consolation.




chapter xxv


'these things happened last winter, sir,' said mrs. dean; 'hardly more
than a year ago.  last winter, i did not think, at another twelve months'
end, i should be amusing a stranger to the family with relating them!
yet, who knows how long you'll be a stranger?  you're too young to rest
always contented, living by yo
 
 ___________________________
 
urself; and i some way fancy no one could
see catherine linton and not love her.  you smile; but why do you look so
lively and interested when i talk about her? and why have you asked me to
hang her picture over your fireplace? and why--?'

'stop, my good friend!' i cried.  'it may be very possible that _i_
should love her; but would she love me?  i doubt it too much to venture
my tranquillity by running into temptation: and then my home is not here.
i'm of the busy world, and to its arms i must return.  go on.  was
catherine obedient to her father'
 
 ___________________________
 
 about to leave his treasure amid perils and
foes, where his remembered words would be the only aid that he could
bequeath to guide her.  he said to me, a few days afterwards, "i wish my
nephew would write, ellen, or call.  tell me, sincerely, what you think
of him: is he changed for the better, or is there a prospect of
improvement, as he grows a man?"

'"he's very delicate, sir," i replied; "and scarcely likely to reach
manhood: but this i can say, he does not resemble his father; and if miss
catherine had the misfortune to marry him, he would not be beyond her
control: unless she were extremely and foolishly indulgent.  however,
master, you'll have plenty of time to get acquainted with him and see
whether he would suit her: it wants four years and more to his being of
age."'

edgar sighed; and, walking to the window, looked out towards gimmerton
kirk. it was a misty afternoon, but the february sun shone dimly, and we
could just distinguish the two fir-trees in the yard, and the
sparely-scatt
 
 ___________________________
 
st blessing!  but should linton be unworthy--only a feeble tool
to his father--i cannot abandon her to him!  and, hard though it be to
crush her buoyant spirit, i must persevere in making her sad while i
live, and leaving her solitary when i die.  darling!  i'd rather resign
her to god, and lay her in the earth before me.'

'resign her to god as it is, sir,' i answered, 'and if we should lose
you--which may he forbid--under his providence, i'll stand her friend and
counsellor to the last.  miss catherine is a good girl: i don't fear that
she will go wilfully wrong; and people who do their duty are always
finally rewarded.'

spring advanced; yet my master gathered no real strength, though he
resumed his walks in the grounds with his daughter.  to her inexperienced
notions, this itself was a sign of convalescence; and then his cheek was
often flushed, and his eyes were bright; she felt sure of his recovering.
on her seventeenth birthday, he did not visit the churchyard: it was
raining, and i obse
 
 ___________________________
 
id been presentable, i've no doubt his father would have permitted
him to come.  as it was, being instructed, he returned an answer,
intimating that mr. heathcliff objected to his calling at the grange; but
his uncle's kind remembrance delighted him, and he hoped to meet him
sometimes in his rambles, and personally to petition that his cousin and
he might not remain long so utterly divided.

that part of his letter was simple, and probably his own.  heathcliff
knew he could plead eloquently for catherine's company, then.

'i do not ask,' he said, 'that she may visit here; but am i never to see
her, because my father forbids me to go to her home, and you forbid her
to come to mine?  do, now and then, ride with her towards the heights;
and let us exchange a few words, in your presence!  we have done nothing
to deserve this separation; and you are not angry with me: you have no
reason to dislike me, you allow, yourself.  dear uncle! send me a kind
note to-morrow, and leave to join you anywhere you
 
 ___________________________
 
 please, except at
thrushcross grange.  i believe an interview would convince you that my
father's character is not mine: he affirms i am more your nephew than his
son; and though i have faults which render me unworthy of catherine, she
has excused them, and for her sake, you should also.  you inquire after
my health--it is better; but while i remain cut off from all hope, and
doomed to solitude, or the society of those who never did and never will
like me, how can i be cheerful and well?'

edgar, though he felt for the boy, could not consent to grant his
request; because he could not accompany catherine.  he said, in summer,
perhaps, they might meet: meantime, he wished him to continue writing at
intervals, and engaged t
 
 ___________________________
 
n he
mentioned riding and walking on the moors, and seemed so earnest in
pursuing his object.  i could not picture a father treating a dying child
as tyrannically and wickedly as i afterwards learned heathcliff had
treated him, to compel this apparent eagerness: his efforts redoubling
the more imminently his avaricious and unfeeling plans were threatened
with defeat by death.




chapter xxvi


summer was already past its prime, when edgar reluctantly yielded his
assent to their entreaties, and catherine and i set out on our first ride
to join her cousin.  it was a close, sultry day: devoid of sunshine, but
with a sky too dappled and hazy to threaten rain: and our place of
meeting had been fixed at the guide-stone, by the cross-roads.  on
arriving there, however, a little herd-boy, despatched as a messenger,
told us that,--'maister linton wer just o' this side th' heights: and
he'd be mitch obleeged to us to gang on a bit further.'

'then master linton has forgot the first injunction of his unc
 
 ___________________________
 
d my
companion; 'our excursion shall lie towards home.'

but when we reached him, and that was scarcely a quarter of a mile from
his own door, we found he had no horse; and we were forced to dismount,
and leave ours to graze.  he lay on the heath, awaiting our approach, and
did not rise till we came within a few yards.  then he walked so feebly,
and looked so pale, that i immediately exclaimed,--'why, master
heathcliff, you are not fit for enjoying a ramble this morning.  how ill
you do look!'

catherine surveyed him with grief and astonishment: she changed the
ejaculation of joy on her lips to one of alarm; and the congratulation on
their long-postponed meeting to an anxious inquiry, whether he were worse
than usual?

'no--better--better!' he panted, trembling, and retaining her hand as if
he needed its support, while his large blue eyes wandered timidly over
her; the hollowness round them transforming to haggard wildness the
languid expression they once possessed.

'but you have been worse,' 
 
 ___________________________
 
te to her entertainment, were so obvious that she could not
conceal her disappointment.  an indefinite alteration had come over his
whole person and manner.  the pettishness that might be caressed into
fondness, had yielded to a listless apathy; there was less of the peevish
temper of a child which frets and teases on purpose to be soothed, and
more of the self-absorbed moroseness of a confirmed invalid, repelling
consolation, and ready to regard the good-humoured mirth of others as an
insult.  catherine perceived, as well as i did, that he held it rather a
punishment, than a gratification, to endure our company; and she made no
scruple of proposing, presently, to depart.  that proposal, unexpectedly,
roused linton from his lethargy, and threw him into a strange state of
agitation.  he glanced fearfully towards the heights, begging she would
remain another half-hour, at least.

'but i think,' said cathy, 'you'd be more comfortable at home than
sitting here; and i cannot amuse you to-day, i see,
 
 ___________________________
 
 by my tales, and
songs, and chatter: you have grown wiser than i, in these six months; you
have little taste for my diversions now: or else, if i could amuse you,
i'd willingly stay.'

'stay to rest yourself,' he replied.  'and, catherine, don't think or say
that i'm _very_ unwell: it is the heavy weather and heat that make me
dull; and i walked about, before you came, a great deal for me.  tell
uncle i'm in tolerable health, will you?'

'i'll tell him that _you_ say so, linton.  i couldn't affirm that you
are,' observed my young lady, wondering at his pertinacious assertion of
what was evidently an untruth.

'and be here again next thursday,' continued he, shunning her puzzled
gaze.  'and give him my thanks for permitting you t
 
 ___________________________
 
o come--my best
thanks, catherine.  and--and, if you _did_ meet my father, and he asked
you about me, don't lead him to suppose that i've been extremely silent
and stupid: don't look sad and downcast, as you are doing--he'll be
angry.'

'i care nothing for his anger,' exclaimed cathy, imagining she would be
its object.

'but i do,' said her cousin, shuddering.  '_don't_ provoke him against
me, catherine, for he is very hard.'

'is he severe to you, master heathcliff?' i inquired.  'has he grown
weary of indulgence, and passed from passive to active hatred?'

linton looked at me, but did not answer; and, after keeping her seat by
his side another ten minutes, during which his head fell drowsily on his
breast, and he uttered nothing except suppressed moans of exhaustion or
pain, cathy began to seek solace in looking for bilberries, and sharing
the produce of her researches with me: she did not o
 
 ___________________________
 
ffer them to him, for
she saw further notice would only weary and annoy.

'is it half-an-hour now, ellen?' she whispered in my ear, at last.  'i
can't tell why we should stay.  he's asleep, and papa will be wanting us
back.'

'well, we must not leave him asleep,' i answered; 'wait till he wakes,
and be patient.  you were mighty eager to set off, but your longing to
see poor linton has soon evaporated!'

'why did _he_ wish to see me?' returned catherine.  'in his crossest
humours, formerly, i liked him better than i do in his present curious
mood.  it's just as if it were a task he was compelled to perform--this
interview--for fear his father should scold him.  but i'm hardly going to
come to give mr. heathcliff pleasure; whatever reason he may have for
ordering linton to undergo this penance.  and, though i'm glad he's
better in health, i'm sorry he's so much less pleasant, and so much less
affectionate to me.'

'you think _he is_ better in h
 
 ___________________________
 
ealth, then?' i said.

'yes,' she answered; 'because he always made such a great deal of his
sufferings, you know.  he is not tolerably well, as he told me to tell
papa; but he's better, very likely.'

'there you differ with me, miss cathy,' i remarked; 'i should conjecture
him to be far worse.'

linton here started from his slumber in bewildered terror, and asked if
any one had called his name.

'no,' said catherine; 'unless in dreams.  i cannot conceive how you
manage to doze out of doors, in the morning.'

'i thought i heard my father,' he gasped, glancing up to the frowning nab
above us.  'you are sure nobody spoke?'

'quite sure,' replied his cousin.  'only ellen and i were disputing
concerning your health.  are you truly stronger, linton, than when we
separated in winter?  if you be, i'm certain one thing is not
stronger--your regard for me: speak,--are you?'

the tears gushed from linton's eyes as he
 
 ___________________________
 
 answered, 'yes, yes, i am!'
and, still under the spell of the imaginary voice, his gaze wandered up
and down to detect its owner.

cathy rose.  'for to-day we must part,' she said.  'and i won't conceal
that i have been sadly disappointed with our meeting; though i'll mention
it to nobody but you: not that i stand in awe of mr. heathcliff.'

'hush,' murmured linton; 'for god's sake, hush!  he's coming.'  and he
clung to catherine's arm, striving to detain her; but at that
announcement she hastily disengaged herself, and whistled to minny, who
obeyed her like a dog.

'i'll be here next thursday,' she cried, springing to the saddle.
'good-bye. quick, ellen!'

and so we left him, scarcely conscious of our departure, so absorbed was
he in anticipating his father's approach.

before we reached home, catherine's displeasure softened into a perplexed
sensation of pity and regret, largely blended with vague, uneasy doubts
about
 
 ___________________________
 
ond journey
would make us better judges.  my master requested an account of our
ongoings.  his nephew's offering of thanks was duly delivered, miss cathy
gently touching on the rest: i also threw little light on his inquiries,
for i hardly knew what to hide and what to reveal.




chapter xxvii


seven days glided away, every one marking its course by the henceforth
rapid alteration of edgar linton's state.  the havoc that months had
previously wrought was now emulated by the inroads of hours.  catherine
we would fain have deluded yet; but her own quick spirit refused to
delude her: it divined in secret, and brooded on the dreadful
probability, gradually ripening into certainty.  she had not the heart to
mention her ride, when thursday came round; i mentioned it for her, and
obtained permission to order her out of doors: for the library, where her
father stopped a short time daily--the brief period he could bear to sit
up--and his chamber, had become her whole world.  she grudged each moment
th
 
 ___________________________
 
e him in mind; for
linton's letters bore few or no indications of his defective character.
and i, through pardonable weakness, refrained from correcting the error;
asking myself what good there would be in disturbing his last moments
with information that he had neither power nor opportunity to turn to
account.

we deferred our excursion till the afternoon; a golden afternoon of
august: every breath from the hills so full of life, that it seemed
whoever respired it, though dying, might revive.  catherine's face was
just like the landscape--shadows and sunshine flitting over it in rapid
succession; but the shadows rested longer, and the sunshine was more
transient; and her poor little heart reproached itself for even that
passing forgetfulness of its cares.

we discerned linton watching at the same spot he had selected before.  my
young mistress alighted, and told me that, as she was resolved to stay a
very little while, i had better hold the pony and remain on horseback;
but i dissented: i woul
 
 ___________________________
 
dn't risk losing sight of the charge committed to
me a minute; so we climbed the slope of heath together.  master
heathcliff received us with greater animation on this occasion: not the
animation of high spirits though, nor yet of joy; it looked more like
fear.

'it is late!' he said, speaking short and with difficulty.  'is not your
father very ill?  i thought you wouldn't come.'

'_why_ won't you be candid?' cried catherine, swallowing her greeting.
'why cannot you say at once you don't want me?  it is strange, linton,
that for the second time you have brought me here on purpose, apparently
to distress us both, and for no reason besides!'

linton shivered, and glanced at her, half supplicating, half ashamed; but
his cousin's patience was not sufficient to endure this enigmatical
behaviour.

'my father _is_ very ill,' she said; 'and why am i called from his
bedside?  why didn't you send to absolve me from my promis
 
 ___________________________
 
e, when you
wished i wouldn't keep it?  come!  i desire an explanation: playing and
trifling are completely banished out of my mind; and i can't dance
attendance on your affectations now!'

'my affectations!' he murmured; 'what are they?  for heaven's sake,
catherine, don't look so angry!  despise me as much as you please; i am a
worthless, cowardly wretch: i can't be scorned enough; but i'm too mean
for your anger.  hate my father, and spare me for contempt.'

'nonsense!' cried catherine in a passion.  'foolish, silly boy!  and
there! he trembles: as if i were really going to touch him!  you needn't
bespeak contempt, linton: anybody will have it spontaneously at your
service.  get off!  i shall return home: it is folly dragging you from
the hearth-stone, and pretending--what do we pretend?  let go my frock!
if i pitied you for crying and looking so very frightened, you should
spurn such pity.  ellen, tell him how disgraceful this conduct is.  rise,
and don't degrade yourself in
 
 ___________________________
 
to an abject reptile--_don't_!'

with streaming face and an expression of agony, linton had thrown his
nerveless frame along the ground: he seemed convulsed with exquisite
terror.

'oh!' he sobbed, 'i cannot bear it!  catherine, catherine, i'm a traitor,
too, and i dare not tell you!  but leave me, and i shall be killed!
_dear_ catherine, my life is in your hands: and you have said you loved
me, and if you did, it wouldn't harm you.  you'll not go, then? kind,
sweet, good catherine!  and perhaps you _will_ consent--and he'll let me
die with you!'

my young lady, on witnessing his intense anguish, stooped to raise him.
the old feeling of indulgent tenderness overcame her vexation, and she
grew thoroughly moved and alarmed.

'consent to what?' she asked.  'to stay! tell me the meaning of this
strange talk, and i will.  you contradict your own words, and distract
me!  be calm and frank, and confess at once all that weighs on your
heart.  you wouldn't injure me, linton, would
 
 ___________________________
 
 you?  you wouldn't let any
enemy hurt me, if you could prevent it?  i'll believe you are a coward,
for yourself, but not a cowardly betrayer of your best friend.'

'but my father threatened me,' gasped the boy, clasping his attenuated
fingers, 'and i dread him--i dread him!  i _dare_ not tell!'

'oh, well!' said catherine, with scornful compassion, 'keep your secret:
_i'm_ no coward.  save yourself: i'm not afraid!'

her magnanimity provoked his tears: he wept wildly, kissing her
supporting hands, and yet could not summon courage to speak out.  i was
cogitating what the mystery might be, and determined catherine should
never suffer to benefit him or any one else, by my good will; when,
hearing a rustle among the ling, i looked up and saw mr. heathcliff
almost close upon us, descending the heights.  he didn't cas
 
 ___________________________
 
nge?  let us hear.  the rumour goes,' he added, in a lower tone,
'that edgar linton is on his death-bed: perhaps they exaggerate his
illness?'

'no; my master is dying,' i replied: 'it is true enough.  a sad thing it
will be for us all, but a blessing for him!'

'how long will he last, do you think?' he asked.

'i don't know,' i said.

'because,' he continued, looking at the two young people, who were fixed
under his eye--linton appeared as if he could not venture to stir or
raise his head, and catherine could not move, on his account--'because
that lad yonder seems determined to beat me; and i'd thank his uncle to
be quick, and go before him!  hallo! has the whelp been playing that game
long?  i _did_ give him some lessons about snivelling.  is he pretty
lively with miss linton generally?'

'lively? no--he has shown the greatest distress,' i answered.  'to see
him, i should say, that instead of rambling with his sweetheart on the
hills, he ought to be in bed, under the hands of a doctor.'

'he
 
 ___________________________
 
 there was nothing
else to produce such humiliation.  he made several efforts to obey, but
his little strength was annihilated for the time, and he fell back again
with a moan.  mr. heathcliff advanced, and lifted him to lean against a
ridge of turf.

'now,' said he, with curbed ferocity, 'i'm getting angry and if you don't
command that paltry spirit of yours--_damn_ you! get up directly!'

'i will, father,' he panted.  'only, let me alone, or i shall faint.  i've
done as you wished, i'm sure.  catherine will tell you that i--that
i--have been cheerful.  ah! keep by me, catherine; give me your hand.'

'take mine,' said his father; 'stand on your feet.  there now--she'll
lend you her arm: that's right, look at her.  you would imagine i was the
devil himself, miss linton, to excite such horror.  be so kind as to walk
home with him, will you?  he shudders if i touch him.'

'linton dear!' whispered catherine, 'i can't go to wuthering heights:
papa has forbidden me.  he'll not harm you: why are you 
 
 ___________________________
 
so afraid?'

'i can never re-enter that house,' he answered.  'i'm _not_ to re-enter
it without you!'

'stop!' cried his father.  'we'll respect catherine's filial scruples.
nelly, take him in, and i'll follow your advice concerning the doctor,
without delay.'

'you'll do well,' replied i.  'but i must remain with my mistress: to
mind your son is not my business.'

'you are very stiff,' said heathcliff, 'i know that: but you'll force me
to pinch the baby and make it scream before it moves your charity.  come,
then, my hero.  are you willing to return, escorted by me?'

he approached once more, and made as if he would seize the fragile being;
but,
 
 ___________________________
 
 shrinking back, linton clung to his cousin, and implored her to
accompany him, with a frantic importunity that admitted no denial.
however i disapproved, i couldn't hinder her: indeed, how could she have
refused him herself?  what was filling him with dread we had no means of
discerning; but there he was, powerless under its grip, and any addition
seemed capable of shocking him into idiotcy.  we reached the threshold;
catherine walked in, and i stood waiting till she had conducted the
invalid to a chair, expecting her out immediately; when mr. heathcliff,
pushing me forward, exclaimed--'my house is not stricken with the plague,
nelly; and i have a mind to be hospitable to-day: sit down, and allow me
to shut the door.'

he shut and locked it also.  i started.

'you shall have tea before you go home,' he added.  'i am by myself.
hareton is gone with some cattle to the lees, and zillah and joseph are
off on a journey of 
 
 ___________________________
 
_.  i give you what i have: the present is hardly worth
accepting; but i have nothing else to offer.  it is linton, i mean.  how
she does stare!  it's odd what a savage feeling i have to anything that
seems afraid of me!  had i been born where laws are less strict and
tastes less dainty, i should treat myself to a slow vivisection of those
two, as an evening's amusement.'

he drew in his breath, struck the table, and swore to himself, 'by hell!
i hate them.'

'i am not afraid of you!' exclaimed catherine, who could not hear the
latter part of his speech.  she stepped close up; her black eyes flashing
with passion and resolution.  'give me that key: i will have it!' she
said.  'i wouldn't eat or drink here, if i were starving.'

heathcliff had the key in his hand that remained on the table.  he looked
up, seized with a sort of surprise at her boldness; or, possibly,
reminded, by her voice and glance, of the person from whom she inherited
it.  she snatched at the instrument, and half succeeded in
 
 ___________________________
 
 getting it out
of his loosened fingers: but her action recalled him to the present; he
recovered it speedily.

'now, catherine linton,' he said, 'stand off, or i shall knock you down;
and, that will make mrs. dean mad.'

regardless of this warning, she captured his closed hand and its contents
again.  'we _will_ go!' she repeated, exerting her utmost efforts to cause
the iron muscles to relax; and finding that her nails made no impression,
she applied her teeth pretty sharply.  heathcliff glanced at me a glance
that kept me from interfering a moment.  catherine was too intent on his
fingers to notice his face.  he open
 
 ___________________________
 
 her on his knee, administered with the
other a shower of terrific slaps on both sides of the head, each
sufficient to have fulfilled his threat, had she been able to fall.

at this diabolical violence i rushed on him furiously. 'you villain!' i
began to cry, 'you villain!' a touch on the chest silenced me: i am
stout, and soon put out of breath; and, what with that and the rage, i
staggered dizzily back and felt ready to suffocate, or to burst a
blood-vessel. the scene was over in two minutes; catherine, released,
put her two hands to her temples, and looked just as if she were not
sure whether her ears were off or on. she trembled like a reed, poor
thing, and leant against the table perfectly bewildered.

'i know how to chastise children, you see,' said the scoundrel, grimly,
as he stooped to repossess himself of the key, which had dropped to the
floor.  'go to linton now, as i told you; and cry at your ease!  i shall
be your father, to-morrow--all the father you'll have in a few days--and
yo
 
 ___________________________
 
isoned, though i prepared it.  i'm going out to seek
your horses.'

our first thought, on his departure, was to force an exit somewhere.  we
tried the kitchen door, but that was fastened outside: we looked at the
windows--they were too narrow for even cathy's little figure.

'master linton,' i cried, seeing we were regularly imprisoned, 'you know
what your diabolical father is after, and you shall tell us, or i'll box
your ears, as he has done your cousin's.'

'yes, linton, you must tell,' said catherine.  'it was for your sake i
came; and it will be wickedly ungrateful if you refuse.'

'give me some tea, i'm thirsty, and then i'll tell you,' he answered.
'mrs. dean, go away.  i don't like you standing over me.  now, catherine,
you are letting your tears fall into my cup.  i won't drink that.  give
me another.'  catherine pushed another to him, and wiped her face.  i
felt disgusted at the little wretch's composure, since he was no longer
in terror for himself.  the anguish he had exhibited on t
 
 ___________________________
 
of my dying if we wait; so we are to be married in the morning,
and you are to stay here all night; and, if you do as he wishes, you
shall return home next day, and take me with you.'

'take you with her, pitiful changeling!' i exclaimed.  '_you_ marry?  why,
the man is mad! or he thinks us fools, every one.  and do you imagine
that beautiful young lady, that healthy, hearty girl, will tie herself to
a little perishing monkey like you?  are you cherishing the notion that
anybody, let alone miss catherine linton, would have you for a husband?
you want whipping for bringing us in here at all, with your dastardly
puling tricks: and--don't look so silly, now!  i've a very good mind to
shake you severely, for your contemptible treachery, and your imbecile
conceit.'

i did give him a slight shaking; but it brought on the cough, and he took
to his ordinary resource of moaning and weeping, and catherine rebuked
me.

'stay all night?  no,' she said, looking slowly round.  'ellen, i'll burn
that door dow
 
 ___________________________
 
n but i'll get out.'

and she would have commenced the execution of her threat directly, but
linton was up in alarm for his dear self again.  he clasped her in his
two feeble arms sobbing:--'won't you have me, and save me? not let me
come to the grange?  oh, darling catherine! you mustn't go and leave,
after all.  you _must_ obey my father--you _must_!'

'i must obey my own,' she replied, 'and relieve him from this cruel
suspense.  the whole night!  what would he think?  he'll be distressed
already.  i'll either break or burn a way out of the house.  be quiet!
you're in no danger; but if you hinder me--linton, i love papa better
than you!'  the mortal terror he felt of mr. heathcliff's anger restored
to the boy his coward's eloquence.  catherine was near distraught:
 
 ___________________________
 
e here to-night; you must undress yourself.  hush!
hold your noise!  once in your own room, i'll not come near you: you
needn't fear.  by chance, you've managed tolerably.  i'll look to the
rest.'

he spoke these words, holding the door open for his son to pass, and the
latter achieved his exit exactly as a spaniel might which suspected the
person who attended on it of designing a spiteful squeeze.  the lock was
re-secured.  heathcliff approached the fire, where my mistress and i
stood silent.  catherine looked up, and instinctively raised her hand to
her cheek: his neighbourhood revived a painful sensation.  anybody else
would have been incapable of regarding the childish act with sternness,
but he scowled on her and muttered--'oh! you are not afraid of me?  your
courage is well disguised: you seem damnably afraid!'

'i _am_ afraid now,' she replied, 'because, if i stay, papa will be
miserable: and how can i endure making him miserable--when he--when
he--mr. heathcliff, let _me_ go home!  i pr
 
 ___________________________
 
!  i don't
want _you_ to speak.  miss linton, i shall enjoy myself remarkably in
thinking your father will be miserable: i shall not sleep for
satisfaction.  you could have hit on no surer way of fixing your
residence under my roof for the next twenty-four hours than informing me
that such an event would follow.  as to your promise to marry linton,
i'll take care you shall keep it; for you shall not quit this place till
it is fulfilled.'

'send ellen, then, to let papa know i'm safe!' exclaimed catherine,
weeping bitterly.  'or marry me now.  poor papa!  ellen, he'll think
we're lost.  what shall we do?'

'not he!  he'll think you are tired of waiting on him, and run off for a
little amusement,' answered heathcliff.  'you cannot deny that you
entered my house of your own accord, in contempt of his injunctions to
the contrary.  and it is quite natural that you should desire amusement
at your age; and that you would weary of nursing a sick man, and that man
_only_ your father.  catherine, his hap
 
 ___________________________
 
 'explain your son's character.  show his
resemblance to yourself: and then, i hope, miss cathy will think twice
before she takes the cockatrice!'

'i don't much mind speaking of his amiable qualities now,' he answered;
'because she must either accept him or remain a prisoner, and you along
with her, till your master dies.  i can detain you both, quite concealed,
here.  if you doubt, encourage her to retract her word, and you'll have
an opportunity of judging!'

'i'll not retract my word,' said catherine.  'i'll marry him within this
hour, if i may go to thrushcross grange afterwards.  mr. heathcliff,
you're a cruel man, but you're not a fiend; and you won't, from _mere_
malice, destroy irrevocably all my happiness.  if papa thought i had left
him on purpose, and if he died before i returned, could i bear to live?
i've given over crying: but i'm going to kneel here, at your knee; and
i'll not get up, and i'll not take my eyes from your face till you look
back at me!  no, don't turn away! _do lo
 
 ___________________________
 
le i got up, and opened my
mouth, to commence a downright torrent of abuse.  but i was rendered dumb
in the middle of the first sentence, by a threat that i should be shown
into a room by myself the very next syllable i uttered.  it was growing
dark--we heard a sound of voices at the garden-gate.  our host hurried
out instantly: _he_ had his wits about him; _we_ had not.  there was a
talk of two or three minutes, and he returned alone.

'i thought it had been your cousin hareton,' i observed to catherine.  'i
wish he would arrive!  who knows but he might take our part?'

'it was three servants sent to seek you from the grange,' said
heathcliff, overhearing me.  'you should have opened a lattice and called
out: but i could swear that chit is glad you didn't.  she's glad to be
obliged to stay, i'm certain.'

at learning the chance we had missed, we both gave vent to our grief
without control; and he allowed us to wail on till nine o'clock.  then he
bid us go upstairs, through the kitchen, to zill
 
 ___________________________
 
ah's chamber; and i
whispered my companion to obey: perhaps we might contrive to get through
the window there, or into a garret, and out by its skylight.  the window,
however, was narrow, like those below, and the garret trap was safe from
our attempts; for we were fastened in as before.  we neither of us lay
down: catherine took her station by the lattice, and watched anxiously
for morning; a deep sigh being the only answer i could obtain to my
frequent entreaties that she would try to rest.  i seated myself in a
chair, and rocked to and fro, passing harsh judgment on my many
derelictions of duty; from which, it struck me then, all the misfortunes
of my employers sprang.  it was not the case, in reality, i am aware; but
it was, in my imagination, that dismal night; and i thought heathcliff
himself less guilty than
 
 ___________________________
 
 i.

at seven o'clock he came, and inquired if miss linton had risen.  she ran
to the door immediately, and answered, 'yes.'  'here, then,' he said,
opening it, and pulling her out.  i rose to follow, but he turned the
lock again.  i demanded my release.

'be patient,' he replied; 'i'll send up your breakfast in a while.'

i thumped on the panels, and rattled the latch angrily and catherine
asked why i was still shut up?  he answered, i must try to endure it
another hour, and they went away.  i endured it two or three hours; at
length, i heard a footstep: not heathcliff's.

'i've brought you something to eat,' said a voice; 'oppen t' door!'

complying eagerly, i beheld hareton, laden with food enough to last me
all day.

'tak' it,' he added, thrusting the tray into my hand.

'stay one minute,' i began.

'nay,' cried he, and retired, regardless of any prayers i could pour
forth to 
 
 ___________________________
 
sage from me, that her young lady will follow in time to
attend the squire's funeral."'

'mr. edgar is not dead?' i gasped.  'oh! zillah, zillah!'

'no, no; sit you down, my good mistress,' she replied; 'you're right
sickly yet.  he's not dead; doctor kenneth thinks he may last another
day.  i met him on the road and asked.'

instead of sitting down, i snatched my outdoor things, and hastened
below, for the way was free.  on entering the house, i looked about for
some one to give information of catherine.  the place was filled with
sunshine, and the door stood wide open; but nobody seemed at hand.  as i
hesitated whether to go off at once, or return and seek my mistress, a
slight cough drew my attention to the hearth.  linton lay on the settle,
sole tenant, sucking a stick of sugar-candy, and pursuing my movements
with apathetic eyes.  'where is miss catherine?' i demanded sternly,
supposing i could frighten him into giving intelligence, by catching him
thus, alone.  he sucked on like an innoce
 
 ___________________________
 
nt.

'is she gone?' i said.

'no,' he replied; 'she's upstairs: she's not to go; we won't let her.'

'you won't let her, little idiot!' i exclaimed.  'direct me to her room
immediately, or i'll make you sing out sharply.'

'papa would make you sing out, if you attempted to get there,' he
answered.  'he says i'm not to be soft with catherine: she's my wife, and
it's shameful that she should wish to leave me.  he says she hates me and
wants me to die, that she may have my money; but she shan't have it: and
she shan't go home!  she never shall!--she may cry, and be sick as much
as she pleases!'

he resumed his former occupation, closing his lids, as if he meant to
drop asleep.

'master heathcliff,' i resumed, 'have you forgotten all catherine's
kindness to you last winter, when you affirmed you loved her, and when
she brought you boo
 
 ___________________________
 
, and he threatened to strangle her
if she was not quiet; but she began again the instant he left the room,
moaning and grieving all night long, though i screamed for vexation that
i couldn't sleep.'

'is mr. heathcliff out?' i inquired, perceiving that the wretched
creature had no power to sympathize with his cousin's mental tortures.

'he's in the court,' he replied, 'talking to doctor kenneth; who says
uncle is dying, truly, at last.  i'm glad, for i shall be master of the
grange after him.  catherine always spoke of it as her house.  it isn't
hers!  it's mine: papa says everything she has is mine.  all her nice
books are mine; she offered to give me them, and her pretty birds, and
her pony minny, if i would get the key of our room, and let her out; but
i told her she had nothing to give, they were all, all mine.  and then
she cried, and took a little picture from her neck, and said i should
have that; two pictures in a gold case, on one side her mother, and on
the other uncle, when they wer
 
 ___________________________
 
onishment of my fellow-servants to see me, and their joy also, was
intense; and when they heard that their little mistress was safe, two or
three were about to hurry up and shout the news at mr. edgar's door: but
i bespoke the announcement of it myself.  how changed i found him, even
in those few days!  he lay an image of sadness and resignation awaiting
his death.  very young he looked: though his actual age was thirty-nine,
one would have called him ten years younger, at least.  he thought of
catherine; for he murmured her name.  i touched his hand, and spoke.

'catherine is coming, dear master!' i whispered; 'she is alive and well;
and will be here, i hope, to-night.'

i trembled at the first effects of this intelligence: he half rose up,
looked eagerly round the apartment, and then sank back in a swoon.  as
soon as he recovered, i related our compulsory visit, and detention at
the heights.  i said heathcliff forced me to go in: which was not quite
true.  i uttered as little as possible agai
 
 ___________________________
 
or did i describe
all his father's brutal conduct--my intentions being to add no
bitterness, if i could help it, to his already over-flowing cup.

he divined that one of his enemy's purposes was to secure the personal
property, as well as the estate, to his son: or rather himself; yet why
he did not wait till his decease was a puzzle to my master, because
ignorant how nearly he and his nephew would quit the world together.
however, he felt that his will had better be altered: instead of leaving
catherine's fortune at her own disposal, he determined to put it in the
hands of trustees for her use during life, and for her children, if she
had any, after her.  by that means, it could not fall to mr. heathcliff
should linton die.

having received his orders, i despatched a man to fetch the attorney, and
four more, provided with serviceable weapons, to demand my young lady of
her jailor.  both parties were delayed very late.  the single servant
returned first.  he said mr. green, the lawyer, was out 
 
 ___________________________
 
when he arrived
at his house, and he had to wait two hours for his re-entrance; and then
mr. green told him he had a little business in the village that must be
done; but he would be at thrushcross grange before morning.  the four men
came back unaccompanied also.  they brought word that catherine was ill:
too ill to quit her room; and heathcliff would not suffer them to see
her.  i scolded the stupid fellows well for listening to that tale, which
i would not carry to my master; resolving to take a whole bevy up to the
heights, at day-light, and storm it literally, unless the prisoner were
quietly surrendered to us.  her father _shall_ see her, i vowed, and
vowed again, if that devil be killed on his own doorstones in trying to
prevent it!

happily, i was spared the journey and the troub
 
 ___________________________
 
de her drink, and
washed her pale face, chafing it into a faint colour with my apron.  then
i said i must go first, and tell of her arrival; imploring her to say,
she should be happy with young heathcliff.  she stared, but soon
comprehending why i counselled her to utter the falsehood, she assured me
she would not complain.

i couldn't abide to be present at their meeting.  i stood outside the
chamber-door a quarter of an hour, and hardly ventured near the bed,
then.  all was composed, however: catherine's despair was as silent as
her father's joy.  she supported him calmly, in appearance; and he fixed
on her features his raised eyes that seemed dilating with ecstasy.

he died blissfully, mr. lockwood: he died so.  kissing her cheek, he
murmured,--'i am going to her; and you, darling child, shall come to us!'
and never stirred or spoke again; but continued that rapt, radiant gaze,
till his pulse imperceptibly stopped and his soul departed.  none could
have noticed the exact minute of his death,
 
 ___________________________
 
 it was so entirely without a
struggle.

whether catherine had spent her tears, or whether the grief were too
weighty to let them flow, she sat there dry-eyed till the sun rose: she
sat till noon, and would still have remained brooding over that deathbed,
but i insisted on her coming away and taking some repose.  it was well i
succeeded in removing her, for at dinner-time appeared the lawyer, having
called at wuthering heights to get his instructions how to behave.  he
had sold himself to mr. heathcliff: that was the cause of his delay in
obeying my ma
 
 ___________________________
 
ter's mind, to disturb him, after his daughter's arrival.

mr. green took upon himself to order everything and everybody about the
place.  he gave all the servants but me, notice to quit.  he would have
carried his delegated authority to the point of insisting that edgar
linton should not be buried beside his wife, but in the chapel, with his
family.  there was the will, however, to hinder that, and my loud
protestations against any infringement of its directions.  the funeral
was hurried over; catherine, mrs. linton heathcliff now, was suffered to
stay at the grange till her father's corpse had quitted it.

she told me that her anguish had at last spurred linton to incur the risk
of liberating her.  she heard the men i sent disputing at the door, and
she gathered the sense of heathcliff's answer.  it drove her desperate.
linton who had been conveyed up to the little parlour soon after i left,
was terrified into fetching the key before his father re-ascended.  he
had the cunning to unlock and r
 
 ___________________________
 
e-lock the door, without shutting it; and
when he should have gone to bed, he begged to sleep with hareton, and his
petition was granted for once.  catherine stole out before break of day.
she dared not try the doors lest the dogs should raise an alarm; she
visited the empty chambers and examined their windows; and, luckily,
lighting on her mother's, she got easily out of its lattice, and on to
the ground, by means of the fir-tree close by.  her accomplice suffered
for his share in the escape, notwithstanding his timid contrivances.




chapter xxix


the evening after the funeral, my young lady and i were seated in the
library; now musing mournfull
 
 ___________________________
 
y--one of us despairingly--on our loss, now
venturing conjectures as to the gloomy future.

we had just agreed the best destiny which could await catherine would be
a permission to continue resident at the grange; at least during linton's
life: he being allowed to join her there, and i to remain as housekeeper.
that seemed rather too favourable an arrangement to be hoped for; and yet
i did hope, and began to cheer up under the prospect of retaining my home
and my employment, and, above all, my beloved young mistress; when a
servant--one of the discarded ones, not yet departed--rushed hastily in,
and said 'that devil heathcliff' was coming through 
 
 ___________________________
 
teen
years before: the same moon shone through the window; and the same autumn
landscape lay outside.  we had not yet lighted a candle, but all the
apartment was visible, even to the portraits on the wall: the splendid
head of mrs. linton, and the graceful one of her husband.  heathcliff
advanced to the hearth.  time had little altered his person either.  there
was the same man: his dark face rather sallower and more composed, his
frame a stone or two heavier, perhaps, and no other difference.  catherine
had risen with an impulse to dash out, when she saw him.

'stop!' he said, arresting her by the arm.  'no more runnings away!  where
would you go?  i'm come to fetch you home; and i hope you'll be a dutiful
daughter and not encourage my son to further disobedience.  i was
embarrassed how to punish him when i discovered his part in the business:
he's such a cobweb, a pinch would annihilate him; but you'll see by his
look that he has received his due!  i brought him down one evening, the
day befo
 
 ___________________________
 
ouched him
afterwards.  i sent hareton out, and we had the room to ourselves.  in
two hours, i called joseph to carry him up again; and since then my
presence is as potent on his nerves as a ghost; and i fancy he sees me
often, though i am not near.  hareton says he wakes and shrieks in the
night by the hour together, and calls you to protect him from me; and,
whether you like your precious mate, or not, you must come: he's your
concern now; i yield all my interest in him to you.'

'why not let catherine continue here,' i pleaded, 'and send master linton
to her?  as you hate them both, you'd not miss them: they can only be a
daily plague to your unnatural heart.'

'i'm seeking a tenant for the grange,' he answered; 'and i want my
children about me, to be sure.  besides, that lass owes me her services
for her bread.  i'm not going to nurture her in luxury and idleness after
linton is gone.  make haste and get ready, now; and don't oblige me to
compel you.'

'i shall,' said catherine.  'linton is
 
 ___________________________
 
o hurt him: you shall get the full benefit of the torment,
as long as it lasts.  it is not i who will make him hateful to you--it is
his own sweet spirit.  he's as bitter as gall at your desertion and its
consequences: don't expect thanks for this noble devotion.  i heard him
draw a pleasant picture to zillah of what he would do if he were as
strong as i: the inclination is there, and his very weakness will sharpen
his wits to find a substitute for strength.'

'i know he has a bad nature,' said catherine: 'he's your son.  but i'm
glad i've a better, to forgive it; and i know he loves me, and for that
reason i love him.  mr. heathcliff _you_ have _nobody_ to love you; and,
however miserable you make us, we shall still have the revenge of
thinking that your cruelty arises from your greater misery.  you _are_
miserable, are you not?  lonely, like the devil, and envious like him?
_nobody_ loves you--_nobody_ will cry for you when you die!  i wouldn't
be you!'

catherine spoke with a kind of dreary 
 
 ___________________________
 
e red embers of the fire, the
brows not contracted, but raised next the temples; diminishing the grim
aspect of his countenance, but imparting a peculiar look of trouble, and
a painful appearance of mental tension towards one absorbing subject.  he
only half addressed me, and i maintained silence.  i didn't like to hear
him talk!  after a short period he resumed his meditation on the picture,
took it down and leant it against the sofa to contemplate it at better
advantage; and while so occupied catherine entered, announcing that she
was ready, when her pony should be saddled.

'send that over to-morrow,' said heathcliff to me; then turning to her,
he added: 'you may do without your pony: it is a fine evening, and you'll
need no ponies at wuthering heights; for what journeys you take, your own
feet will serve you.  come along.'

'good-bye, ellen!' whispered my dear little mistress.

as she kissed me, her lips felt like ice.  'come and see me, ellen; don't
forget.'

'take care you do no such thin
 
 ___________________________
 
g, mrs. dean!' said her new father.  'when
i wish to speak to you i'll come here.  i want none of your prying at my
house!'

he signed her to precede him; and casting back a look that cut my heart,
she obeyed.  i watched them, from the window, walk down the garden.
heathcliff fixed catherine's arm under his: though she disputed the act
at first evidently; and with rapid strides he hurried her into the alley,
whose trees concealed them.




chapter xxx


i have paid a visit to the heights, but i have not seen her since she
left: joseph held the door in his hand when i called to ask after her,
and wouldn't let me pass.  he said mrs. linton was 'thrang,' and the
master was not in.  zillah has told me something of the way they go on,
otherwise i should hardly know who was dead and who 
 
 ___________________________
 
living.  she thinks
catherine haughty, and does not like her, i can guess by her talk.  my
young lady asked some aid of her when she first came; but mr. heathcliff
told her to follow her own business, and let his daughter-in-law look
after herself; and zillah willingly acquiesced, being a narrow-minded,
selfish woman.  catherine evinced a child's annoyance at this neglect;
repaid it with contempt, and thus enlisted my informant among her
enemies, as securely as if she had done her some great wrong.  i had a
long talk with zillah about six weeks ago, a little before you came, one
day when we foregathered on the moor; and this is what she told me.

'the first thing mrs. linton did,' she said, 'on her arrival at the
heights, was to run up-stairs, without even wishing good-evening to me
and joseph; she shut herself into li
 
 ___________________________
 
m."

'having uttered this speech, she vanished again.  i lay a quarter of an
hour listening and trembling.  nothing stirred--the house was quiet.

'she's mistaken, i said to myself.  he's got over it.  i needn't disturb
them; and i began to doze.  but my sleep was marred a second time by a
sharp ringing of the bell--the only bell we have, put up on purpose for
linton; and the master called to me to see what was the matter, and
inform them that he wouldn't have that noise repeated.

'i delivered catherine's message.  he cursed to himself, and in a few
minutes came out with a lighted candle, and proceeded to their room.  i
followed.  mrs. heathcliff was seated by the bedside, with her hands
folded on her knees.  her father-in-law went up, held the light to
linton's face, looked at him, and touched him; afterwards he turned to
her.

'"now--catherine," he said, "how do you feel?"

'she was dumb.

'"how do you feel, catherine?" he repeated.

'"he's safe, and i'm free," she answered: "i should feel w
 
 ___________________________
 
ell--but," she
continued, with a bitterness she couldn't conceal, "you have left me so
long to struggle against death alone, that i feel and see only death!  i
feel like death!"

'and she looked like it, too!  i gave her a little wine.  hareton and
joseph, who had been wakened by the ringing and the sound of feet, and
heard our talk from outside, now entered.  joseph was fain, i believe, of
the lad's removal; hareton seemed a thought bothered: though he was more
taken up with staring at catherine than thinking of linton.  but the
master bid him get off to bed again: we didn't want his help.  he
afterwards made joseph remove the body to his chamber, and told me to
return to mine, and mrs. heathcliff remained by herself.

'in the morning, he sent me to tell her she must come down to breakfast:
she had undressed, and appeared going to sleep, and said she was ill; at
which i hardly wondered.  i informed mr. heathcliff, and he
replied,--"well, let her be till after the funeral; and go up now
 
 ___________________________
 
but her attempts
at increasing kindness were proudly and promptly repelled.

heathcliff went up once, to show her linton's will.  he had bequeathed
the whole of his, and what had been her, moveable property, to his
father: the poor creature was threatened, or coaxed, into that act during
her week's absence, when his uncle died.  the lands, being a minor, he
could not meddle with.  however, mr. heathcliff has claimed and kept them
in his wife's right and his also: i suppose legally; at any rate,
catherine, destitute of cash and friends, cannot disturb his possession.

'nobody,' said zillah, 'ever approached her door, except that once, but
i; and nobody asked anything about her.  the first occasion of her coming
down into the house was on a sunday afternoon.  she had cried out, when i
carried up her dinner, that she couldn't bear any longer being in the
cold; and i told her the master was going to thrushcross grange, and
earnshaw and i needn't hinder her from descending; so, as soon as she
heard 
 
 ___________________________
 
n to swear.

'now, mrs. dean,' zillah went on, seeing me not pleased by her manner,
'you happen think your young lady too fine for mr. hareton; and happen
you're right: but i own i should love well to bring her pride a peg
lower.  and what will all her learning and her daintiness do for her,
now?  she's as poor as you or i: poorer, i'll be bound: you're saying,
and i'm doing my little all that road.'

hareton allowed zillah to give him her aid; and she flattered him into a
good humour; so, when catherine came, half forgetting her former insults,
he tried to make himself agreeable, by the housekeeper's account.

'missis walked in,' she said, 'as chill as an icicle, and as high as a
princess.  i got up and offered her my seat in the arm-chair.  no, she
turned up her nose at my civility.  earnshaw rose, too, and bid her come
to the settle, and sit close by the fire: he was sure she was starved.

'"i've been starved a month and more," she answered, resting on the word
as scornful as she could.

'an
 
 ___________________________
 
there
should be no further scorning at my good nature: ever since, i've been as
stiff as herself; and she has no lover or liker among us: and she does
not deserve one; for, let them say the least word to her, and she'll curl
back without respect of any one.  she'll snap at the master himself, and
as good as dares him to thrash her; and the more hurt she gets, the more
venomous she grows.'

at first, on hearing this account from zillah, i determined to leave my
situation, take a cottage, and get catherine to come and live with me:
but mr. heathcliff would as soon permit that as he would set up hareton
in an independent house; and i can see no remedy, at present, unless she
could marry again; and that scheme it does not come within my province to
arrange.

* * * * *

thus ended mrs. dean's story.  notwithstanding the doctor's prophecy, i
am rapidly recovering strength; and though it be only the second week in
january, i propose getting out on horseback in a day or two, and riding
over to wutherin
 
 ___________________________
 
  the
fellow is as handsome a rustic as need be seen.  i took particular notice
of him this time; but then he does his best apparently to make the least
of his advantages.

i asked if mr. heathcliff were at home?  he answered, no; but he would be
in at dinner-time.  it was eleven o'clock, and i announced my intention
of going in and waiting for him; at which he immediately flung down his
tools and accompanied me, in the office of watchdog, not as a substitute
for the host.

we entered together; catherine was there, making herself useful in
preparing some vegetables for the approaching meal; she looked more
sulky and less spirited than when i had seen her first. she hardly
raised her eyes to notice me, and continued her employment with the same
disregard to common forms of politeness as before; never returning my
bow and good-morning by the slightest acknowledgment.

'she does not seem so amiable,' i thought, 'as mrs. dean would persuade
me to believe.  she's a beauty, it is true; but not an ang
 
 ___________________________
 
 i fancied, adroitly
dropped mrs. dean's note on to her knee, unnoticed by hareton--but she
asked aloud, 'what is that?'  and chucked it off.

'a letter from your old acquaintance, the housekeeper at the grange,' i
answered; annoyed at her exposing my kind deed, and fearful lest it
should be imagined a missive of my own.  she would gladly have gathered
it up at this information, but hareton beat her; he seized and put it in
his waistcoat, saying mr. heathcliff should look at it first.  thereat,
catherine silently turned her face from us, and, very stealthily, drew
out her pocket-handkerchief and applied it to her eyes; and her cousin,
after struggling awhile to keep down his softer feelings, pulled out the
letter and flung it on the floor beside her, as ungraciously as he could.
catherine caught and perused it eagerly; then she put a few questions to
me concerning the inmates, rational and irrational, of her former home;
and gazing towards the hills, murmured in soliloquy:

'i should like to be
 
 ___________________________
 
n like you?'

'yes, very well,' i replied, hesitatingly.

'you must tell her,' she continued, 'that i would answer her letter, but
i have no materials for writing: not even a book from which i might tear
a leaf.'

'no books!' i exclaimed.  'how do you contrive to live here without them?
if i may take the liberty to inquire.  though provided with a large
library, i'm frequently very dull at the grange; take my books away, and
i should be desperate!'

'i was always reading, when i had them,' said catherine; 'and mr.
heathcliff never reads; so he took it into his head to destroy my books.
i have not had a glimpse of one for weeks.  only once, i searched through
joseph's store of theology, to his great irritation; and once, hareton, i
came upon a secret stock in your room--some latin and greek, and some
tales and poetry: all old friends.  i brought the last here--and you
gathered them, as a magpie gathers silver spoons, for the mere love of
stealing!  they are of no use to you; or else you conceale
 
 ___________________________
 
hem written on my brain and printed in my heart, and you
cannot deprive me of those!'

earnshaw blushed crimson when his cousin made this revelation of his
private literary accumulations, and stammered an indignant denial of her
accusations.

'mr. hareton is desirous of increasing his amount of knowledge,' i said,
coming to his rescue.  'he is not _envious_, but _emulous_ of your
attainments.  he'll be a clever scholar in a few years.'

'and he wants me to sink into a dunce, meantime,' answered catherine.
'yes, i hear him trying to spell and read to himself, and pretty blunders
he makes!  i wish you would repeat chevy chase as you did yesterday: it
was extremely funny.  i heard you; and i heard you turning over the
dictionary to seek out the hard words, and then cursing because you
couldn't read their explanations!'

the young man evidently thought it too bad that he should be laughed at
for his ignorance, and then laughed at for trying to remove it.  i had a
similar notion; and, remembering mr
 
 ___________________________
 
te pieces that i love the most to repeat, as if out of
deliberate malice.'

hareton's chest heaved in silence a minute: he laboured under a severe
sense of mortification and wrath, which it was no easy task to suppress.
i rose, and, from a gentlemanly idea of relieving his embarrassment, took
up my station in the doorway, surveying the external prospect as i stood.
he followed my example, and left the room; but presently reappeared,
bearing half a dozen volumes in his hands, which he threw into
catherine's lap, exclaiming,--'take them!  i never want to hear, or read,
or think of them again!'

'i won't have them now,' she answered.  'i shall connect them with you,
and hate them.'

she opened one that had obviously been often turned over, and read a
portion in the drawling tone of a beginner; then laughed, and threw it
from her.  'and listen,' she continued, provokingly, commencing a verse
of an old ballad in the same fashion.

but his self-love would endure no further torment: i heard, and not
a
 
 ___________________________
 
e account, and repaying its effects on the inflictor.  he
afterwards gathered the books and hurled them on the fire.  i read in his
countenance what anguish it was to offer that sacrifice to spleen.  i
fancied that as they consumed, he recalled the pleasure they had already
imparted, and the triumph and ever-increasing pleasure he had anticipated
from them; and i fancied i guessed the incitement to his secret studies
also.  he had been content with daily labour and rough animal enjoyments,
till catherine crossed his path.  shame at her scorn, and hope of her
approval, were his first prompters to higher pursuits; and instead of
guarding him from one and winning him to the other, his endeavours to
raise himself had produced just the contrary result.

'yes that's all the good that such a brute as you can get from them!'
cried catherine, sucking her damaged lip, and watching the conflagration
with indignant eyes.

'you'd _better_ hold your tongue, now,' he answered fiercely.

and his agitation prec
 
 ___________________________
 
upy, your journey is useless: i never relent in exacting my due from
any one.'

'i'm coming to plead off nothing about it,' i exclaimed, considerably
irritated.  'should you wish it, i'll settle with you now,' and i drew my
note-book from my pocket.

'no, no,' he replied, coolly; 'you'll leave sufficient behind to cover
your debts, if you fail to return: i'm not in such a hurry.  sit down and
take your dinner with us; a guest that is safe from repeating his visit
can generally be made welcome.  catherine! bring the things in: where are
you?'

catherine reappeared, bearing a tray of knives and forks.

'you may get your dinner with joseph,' muttered heathcliff, aside, 'and
remain in the kitchen till he is gone.'

she obeyed his directions very punctually: perhaps she had no temptation
to transgress.  living among clowns and misanthropists, she probably
cannot appreciate a better class of people when she meets them.

with mr. heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on the one hand, and hareton,
absolutely
 
 ___________________________
 
 dumb, on the other, i made a somewhat cheerless meal, and bade
adieu early.  i would have departed by the back way, to get a last
glimpse of catherine and annoy old joseph; but hareton received orders to
lead up my horse, and my host himself escorted me to the door, so i could
not fulfil my wish.

'how dreary life gets over in that house!' i reflected, while riding down
the road.  'what a realisation of something more romantic than a fairy
tale it would have been for mrs. linton heathcliff, had she and i struck
up an attachment, as her good nurse desired, and migrated together into
the stirring atmosphere of the town!'




chapter xxxii


180
 
 ___________________________
 
wers at her
time of life?  and then, to get them jocks out o' t' maister's cellar!  he
fair shaamed to 'bide still and see it.'

she did not stay to retaliate, but re-entered in a minute, bearing a
reaming silver pint, whose contents i lauded with becoming earnestness.
and afterwards she furnished me with the sequel of heathcliff's history.
he had a 'queer' end, as she expressed it.

i was summoned to wuthering heights, within a fortnight of your leaving
us, she said; and i obeyed joyfully, for catherine's sake. my first
interview with her grieved and shocked me: she had altered so much since
our separation.  mr. heathcliff did not explain his reasons for taking a
new mind about my coming here; he only told me he wanted me, and he was
tired of seeing catherine: i must make the little parlour my
sitting-room, and keep her with me. it was enough if he were obliged to
see her once or twice a day. she seemed pleased at this arrangement; and,
by degrees, i smuggled over a great number of books, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
other articles,
that had formed her amusement at the grange; and flattered myself we
should get on in tolerable comfort.  the delusion did not last long.
catherine, contented at first, in a brief space grew irritable and
restless. for one thing, she was forbidden to move out of the garden, and
it fretted her sadly to be confined to its narrow bounds as spring drew
on; for another, in following the house, i was forced to quit her
frequently, and she complained of loneliness: she preferred quarrelling
with joseph in the kitchen to sitting at peace in her solitude.  i did
not mind their skirmishes: but hareton was often obliged to seek the
kitchen also, when
 
 ___________________________
 

there, she generally paused in an interesting part, and left the book
lying about: that she did repeatedly; but he was as obstinate as a mule,
and, instead of snatching at her bait, in wet weather he took to smoking
with joseph; and they sat like automatons, one on each side of the fire,
the elder happily too deaf to understand her wicked nonsense, as he would
have called it, the younger doing his best to seem to disregard it.  on
fine evenings the latter followed his shooting expeditions, and catherine
yawned and sighed, and teased me to talk to her, and ran off into the
court or garden the moment i began; and, as a last resource, cried, and
said she was tired of living: her life was useless.

mr. heathcliff, who grew more and more disinclined to society, had almost
banished earnshaw from his apartment.  owing to an accident at the
commencement of march, he became for some days a fixture in the kitchen.
his gun burst while out on the hills by himself; a splinter cut his arm,
and he lost a goo
 
 ___________________________
 
d deal of blood before he could reach home.  the
consequence was that, perforce, he was condemned to the fireside and
tranquillity, till he made it up again.  it suited catherine to have him
there: at any rate, it made her hate her room up-stairs more than ever:
and she would compel me to find out business below, that she might
accompany me.

on easter monday, joseph went to gimmerton fair with some cattle; and, in
the afternoon, i was busy getting up linen in the kitchen.  earnshaw sat,
morose as usual, at the chimney corner, and my little mistress was
beguiling an idle hour with drawing pictures on the window-panes, varying
her amusement by smothered bursts of songs, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 persisted, 'i won't: i can't tell what to do to make you talk
to me; and you are determined not to understand.  when i call you stupid,
i don't mean anything: i don't mean that i despise you.  come, you shall
take notice of me, hareton: you are my cousin, and you shall own me.'

'i shall have naught to do wi' you and your mucky pride, and your damned
mocking tricks!' he answered.  'i'll go to hell, body and soul, before i
look sideways after you again.  side out o' t' gate, now, this minute!'

catherine frowned, and retreated to the window-seat chewing her lip, and
endeavouring, by humming an eccentric tune, to conceal a growing tendency
to sob.

'you should be friends with your cousin, mr. hareton,' i interrupted,
'since she repents of her sauciness.  it would do you a great deal of
good: it would make you another man to have her for a companion.'

'a companion!' he cried; 'when she hates me, and does not think me fit to
wipe her shoon!  nay, if it made me a king, i'd not be scorned for
seeki
 
 ___________________________
 
at when you sneered at and
despised me, and--go on plaguing me, and i'll step in yonder, and say you
worried me out of the kitchen!'

'i didn't know you took my part,' she answered, drying her eyes; 'and i
was miserable and bitter at everybody; but now i thank you, and beg you
to forgive me: what can i do besides?'

she returned to the hearth, and frankly extended her hand.  he blackened
and scowled like a thunder-cloud, and kept his fists resolutely clenched,
and his gaze fixed on the ground.  catherine, by instinct, must have
divined it was obdurate perversity, and not dislike, that prompted this
dogged conduct; for, after remaining an instant undecided, she stooped
and impressed on his cheek a gentle kiss.  the little rogue thought i had
not seen her, and, drawing back, she took her former station by the
window, quite demurely.  i shook my head reprovingly, and then she
blushed and whispered--'well! what should i have done, ellen?  he
wouldn't shake hands, and he wouldn't look: i must show h
 
 ___________________________
 
im some way that
i like him--that i want to be friends.'

whether the kiss convinced hareton, i cannot tell: he was very careful,
for some minutes, that his face should not be seen, and when he did raise
it, he was sadly puzzled where to turn his eyes.

catherine employed herself in wrapping a handsome book neatly in white
paper, and having tied it with a bit of ribbon, and addressed it to 'mr.
hareton earnshaw,' she desired me to be her ambassadress, and convey the
present to its destined recipient.

'and tell him, if he'll take it, i'll come and teach him to read it
right,' she said; 'and, if he refuse it, i'll go upstairs, and never
tease him again.'

i carried it, and repeated the message; anxiously watched by my employer.
hareton would not open his
 
 ___________________________
 
 fingers, so i laid it on his knee.  he did not
strike it off, either.  i returned to my work.  catherine leaned her head
and arms on the table, till she heard the slight rustle of the covering
being removed; then she stole away, and quietly seated herself beside her
cousin.  he trembled, and his face glowed: all his rudeness and all his
surly harshness had deserted him: he could not summon courage, at first,
to utter a syllable in reply to her questioning look, and her murmured
petition.

'say you forgive me, hareton, do.  you can make me so happy by speaking
that little word.'

he muttered someth
 
 ___________________________
 
ing inaudible.

'and you'll be my friend?' added catherine, interrogatively.

'nay, you'll be ashamed of me every day of your life,' he answered; 'and
the more ashamed, the more you know me; and i cannot bide it.'

'so you won't be my friend?' she said, smiling as sweet as honey, and
creeping close up.

i overheard no further distinguishable talk, but, on looking round again,
i perceived two such radiant countenances bent over the page of the
accepted book, that i did not doubt the treaty had been ratified on both
sides; and the enemies were, thencefor
 
 ___________________________
 
th, sworn allies.

the work they studied was full of costly pictures; and those and their
position had charm enough to keep them unmoved till joseph came home.  he,
poor man, was perfectly aghast at the spectacle of catherine seated on
the same bench with hareton earnshaw, leaning her hand on his shoulder;
and confounded at his favourite's endurance of her proximity: it affected
him too deeply to allow an observation on the subject that night.  his
emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs he drew, as he solemnly
spread his large bible on the table, and overlaid it with dirty
bank-notes from his pocket-book, the produce of the day's transactions.
at length he summoned hareton from his seat.

'tak' these in to t
 
 ___________________________
 
' maister, lad,' he said, 'and bide there.  i's gang
up to my own rahm.  this hoile's neither mensful nor seemly for us: we
mun side out and seearch another.'

'come, catherine,' i said, 'we must "side out" too: i've done my ironing.
are you ready to go?'

'it is not eight o'clock!' she answered, rising unwillingly.

'hareton, i'll leave this book upon the chimney-piece, and i'll bring
some more to-morrow.'

'ony books that yah leave, i shall tak' into th' hahse,' said joseph,
'and it'll be mitch if yah find 'em agean; soa, yah may plase yerseln!'

cathy threatened that his library should pay for hers; and, smiling as
she passed hareton, went singing up-stairs: lighte
 
 ___________________________
 

it is discovered.  and what excuse have you to offer for taking such
liberties with the garden?  we shall have a fine explosion on the head of
it: see if we don't!  mr. hareton, i wonder you should have no more wit
than to go and make that mess at her bidding!'

'i'd forgotten they were joseph's,' answered earnshaw, rather puzzled;
'but i'll tell him i did it.'

we always ate our meals with mr. heathcliff.  i held the mistress's post
in making tea and carving; so i was indispensable at table.  catherine
usually sat by me, but to-day she stole nearer to hareton; and i
presently saw she would have no more discretion in her friendship than
she had in her hostility.

'now, mind you don't talk with and notice your cousin too much,' were my
whispered instructions as we entered the room.  'it will certainly annoy
mr. heathcliff, and he'll be mad at you both.'

'i'm not going to,' she answered.

the minute after, she had sidled to him, and was sticking primroses in
his plate of porridge.

he dared not
 
 ___________________________
 
eak to her there: he dared hardly look; and yet she went
on teasing, till he was twice on the point of being provoked to laugh.  i
frowned, and then she glanced towards the master: whose mind was occupied
on other subjects than his company, as his countenance evinced; and she
grew serious for an instant, scrutinizing him with deep gravity.
afterwards she turned, and recommenced her nonsense; at last, hareton
uttered a smothered laugh.  mr. heathcliff started; his eye rapidly
surveyed our faces, catherine met it with her accustomed look of
nervousness and yet defiance, which he abhorred.

'it is well you are out of my reach,' he exclaimed.  'what fiend
possesses you to stare back at me, continually, with those infernal eyes?
down with them! and don't remind me of your existence again.  i thought i
had cured you of laughing.'

'it was me,' muttered hareton.

'what do you say?' demanded the master.

hareton looked at his plate, and did not repeat the confession.  mr.
heathcliff looked at him a bit
 
 ___________________________
 
e's
forgotten all i've done for him, and made on him, and goan and riven up a
whole row o' t' grandest currant-trees i' t' garden!' and here he
lamented outright; unmanned by a sense of his bitter injuries, and
earnshaw's ingratitude and dangerous condition.

'is the fool drunk?' asked mr. heathcliff.  'hareton, is it you he's
finding fault with?'

'i've pulled up two or three bushes,' replied the young man; 'but i'm
going to set 'em again.'

'and why have you pulled them up?' said the master.

catherine wisely put in her tongue.

'we wanted to plant some flowers there,' she cried.  'i'm the only person
to blame, for i wished him to do it.'

'and who the devil gave _you_ leave to touch a stick about the place?'
demanded her father-in-law, much surprised.  'and who ordered _you_ to
obey her?' he added, turning to hareton.

the latter was speechless; his cousin replied--'you shouldn't grudge a
few yards of earth for me to ornament, when you have taken all my land!'

'your land, insolent slut!  yo
 
 ___________________________
 
f hareton does not turn you out of the room, i'll strike him to hell,'
thundered heathcliff.  'damnable witch! dare you pretend to rouse him
against me?  off with her!  do you hear?  fling her into the kitchen!
i'll kill her, ellen dean, if you let her come into my sight again!'

hareton tried, under his breath, to persuade her to go.

'drag her away!' he cried, savagely.  'are you staying to talk?'  and he
approached to execute his own command.

'he'll not obey you, wicked man, any more,' said catherine; 'and he'll
soon detest you as much as i do.'

'wisht! wisht!' muttered the young man, reproachfully; 'i will not hear
you speak so to him.  have done.'

'but you won't let him strike me?' she cried.

'come, then,' he whispered earnestly.

it was too late: heathcliff had caught hold of her.

'now, _you_ go!' he said to earnshaw.  'accursed witch! this time she has
provoked me when i could not bear it; and i'll make her repent it for
ever!'

he had his hand in her hair; hareton attempted to rele
 
 ___________________________
 
ase her locks,
entreating him not to hurt her that once.  heathcliff's black eyes
flashed; he seemed ready to tear catherine in pieces, and i was just
worked up to risk coming to the rescue, when of a sudden his fingers
relaxed; he shifted his grasp from her head to her arm, and gazed
intently in her face.  then he drew his hand over his eyes, stood a
moment to collect himself apparently, and turning anew to catherine,
said, with assumed calmness--'you must learn to avoid putting me in a
passion, or i shall really murder you some time!  go with mrs. dean, and
keep with her; and confine your insolence to her ears.  as to hareton
earnshaw, if i see him listen to you, i'll send him seeking his bread
where he can get it!  your love will make him an outcast and a beggar.
nelly, take her; and leave me, all of you!  leave me!'

i led my young lady out: she was too glad of her escape to resist; the
other followed, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd mr. heathcliff had the room to himself till dinner.  i
had counselled catherine to dine up-stairs; but, as soon as he perceived
her vacant seat, he sent me to call her.  he spoke to none of us, ate
very little, and went out directly afterwards, intimating that he should
not return before evening.

the two new friends established themselves in the house during his
absence; where i heard hareton sternly check his cousin, on her offering
a revelation of her father-in-law's conduct to his father.  he said he
wouldn't suffer a word to be uttered in his disparagement: if he were
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
devil, it didn't signify; he would stand by him; and he'd rather she
would abuse himself, as she used to, than begin on mr. heathcliff.
catherine was waxing cross at this; but he found means to make her hold
her tongue, by asking how she would like _him_ to speak ill of her
father?  then she comprehended that earnshaw took the master's reputation
home to himself; and was attached by ties stronger than reason could
break--chains, forged by habit, which it would be cruel to attempt to
loosen.  she showed a good heart, thenceforth, in avoiding both
complaints and expressions of antipathy concerning heathcliff; and
confessed to me her sorrow
 
 ___________________________
 
sy as possible in their several occupations of pupil and teacher.  i
came in to sit with them, after i had done my work; and i felt so soothed
and comforted to watch them, that i did not notice how time got on.  you
know, they both appeared in a measure my children: i had long been proud
of one; and now, i was sure, the other would be a source of equal
satisfaction.  his honest, warm, and intelligent nature shook off rapidly
the clouds of ignorance and degradation in which it had been bred; and
catherine's sincere commendations acted as a spur to his industry.  his
brightening mind brightened his features, and added spirit and nobility
to their aspect: i could hardly fancy it the same individual i had beheld
on the day i discovered my little lady at wuthering heights, after her
expedition to the crags.  while i admired and they laboured, dusk drew
on, and with it returned the master.  he came upon us quite unexpectedly,
entering by the front way, and had a full view of the whole three, ere we
c
 
 ___________________________
 
will be a burning
shame to scold them.  the red fire-light glowed on their two bonny heads,
and revealed their faces animated with the eager interest of children;
for, though he was twenty-three and she eighteen, each had so much of
novelty to feel and learn, that neither experienced nor evinced the
sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity.

they lifted their eyes together, to encounter mr. heathcliff: perhaps you
have never remarked that their eyes are precisely similar, and they are
those of catherine earnshaw.  the present catherine has no other likeness
to her, except a breadth of forehead, and a certain arch of the nostril
that makes her appear rather haughty, whether she will or not.  with
hareton the resemblance is carried farther: it is singular at all times,
_then_ it was particularly striking; because his senses were alert, and
his mental faculties wakened to unwonted activity.  i suppose this
resemblance disarmed mr. heathcliff: he walked to the hearth in evident
agitation; but it q
 
 ___________________________
 
uickly subsided as he looked at the young man: or, i
should say, altered its character; for it was there yet.  he took the
book from his hand, and glanced at the open page, then returned it
without any observation; merely signing catherine away: her companion
lingered very little behind her, and i was about to depart also, but he
bid me sit still.

'it is a poor conclusion, is it not?' he observed, having brooded awhile
on the scene he had just witnessed: 'an absurd termination to my violent
exertions?  i get levers and mattocks to demolish the two houses, and
train myself to be capable of working like hercules, and when everything
is ready and in my power, i find the will to lift a slate off either roof
has vanished!  my old ene
 
 ___________________________
 
king an effort to smile, 'if i try to describe the thousand
forms of past associations and ideas he awakens or embodies.  but you'll
not talk of what i tell you; and my mind is so eternally secluded in
itself, it is tempting at last to turn it out to another.

'five minutes ago hareton seemed a personification of my youth, not a
human being; i felt to him in such a variety of ways, that it would have
been impossible to have accosted him rationally.  in the first place, his
startling likeness to catherine connected him fearfully with her.  that,
however, which you may suppose the most potent to arrest my imagination,
is actually the least: for what is not connected with her to me? and what
does not recall her?  i cannot look down to this floor, but her features
are shaped in the flags!  in every cloud, in every tree--filling the air
at night, and caught by glimpses in every object by day--i am surrounded
with her image!  the most ordinary faces of men and women--my own
features--mock me with a r
 
 ___________________________
 
etely to his feelings, choosing
rather to absent himself; and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed
sufficient sustenance for him.

one night, after the family were in bed, i heard him go downstairs, and
out at the front door.  i did not hear him re-enter, and in the morning i
found he was still away.  we were in april then: the weather was sweet
and warm, the grass as green as showers and sun could make it, and the
two dwarf apple-trees near the southern wall in full bloom.  after
breakfast, catherine insisted on my bringing a chair and sitting with my
work under the fir-trees at the end of the house; and she beguiled
hareton, who had perfectly recovered from his accident, to dig and
arrange her little garden, which was shifted to that corner by the
influence of joseph's complaints.  i was comfortably revelling in the
spring fragrance around, and the beautiful soft blue overhead, when my
young lady, who had run down near the gate to procure some primrose roots
for a border, returned only hal
 
 ___________________________
 
 in allusion to my
morning's speech; 'and i'm ready to do justice to the food you give me.'

he took his knife and fork, and was going to commence eating, when the
inclination appeared to become suddenly extinct.  he laid them on the
table, looked eagerly towards the window, then rose and went out.  we saw
him walking to and fro in the garden while we concluded our meal, and
earnshaw said he'd go and ask why he would not dine: he thought we had
grieved him some way.

'well, is he coming?' cried catherine, when her cousin returned.

'nay,' he answered; 'but he's not angry: he seemed rarely pleased indeed;
only i made him impatient by speaking to him twice; and then he bid me be
off to you: he wondered how i could want the company of anybody else.'

i set his plate to keep warm on the fender; and after an hour or two he
re-entered, when the room was clear, in no degree calmer: the same
unnatural--it was unnatural--appearance of joy under his black brows; the
same bloodless hue, and his teeth visi
 
 ___________________________
 
tent
ourselves with the single word, 'heathcliff.'  that came true: we were.
if you enter the kirkyard, you'll read, on his headstone, only that, and
the date of his death.

dawn restored me to common sense.  i rose, and went into the garden, as
soon as i could see, to ascertain if there were any footmarks under his
window.  there were none.  'he has stayed at home,' i thought, 'and he'll
be all right to-day.'  i prepared breakfast for the household, as was my
usual custom, but told hareton and catherine to get theirs ere the master
came down, for he lay late.  they preferred taking it out of doors, under
the trees, and i set a little table to accommodate them.

on my re-entrance, i found mr. heathcliff below.  he and joseph were
conversing about some farming business; he gave clear, minute directions
concerning the matter discussed, but he spoke rapidly, and turned his
head continually aside, and had the same excited expression, even more
exaggerated.  when joseph quitted the room he took his 
 
 ___________________________
 
did, i could not sleep.  he returned after
midnight, and, instead of going to bed, shut himself into the room
beneath.  i listened, and tossed about, and, finally, dressed and
descended.  it was too irksome to lie there, harassing my brain with a
hundred idle misgivings.

i distinguished mr. heathcliff's step, restlessly measuring the floor,
and he frequently broke the silence by a deep inspiration, resembling a
groan.  he muttered detached words also; the only one i could catch was
the name of catherine, coupled with some wild term of endearment or
suffering; and spoken as one would speak to a person present; low and
earnest, and wrung from the depth of his soul.  i had not courage to walk
straight into the apartment; but i desired to divert him from his
reverie, and therefore fell foul of the kitchen fire, stirred it, and
began to scrape the cinders.  it drew him forth sooner than i expected.
he opened the door immediately, and said--'nelly, come here--is it
morning?  come in with your light.
 
 ___________________________
 
 den, and i breathed freer.  but in the afternoon, while joseph and
hareton were at their work, he came into the kitchen again, and, with a
wild look, bid me come and sit in the house: he wanted somebody with him.
i declined; telling him plainly that his strange talk and manner
frightened me, and i had neither the nerve nor the will to be his
companion alone.

'i believe you think me a fiend,' he said, with his dismal laugh:
'something too horrible to live under a decent roof.'  then turning to
catherine, who was there, and who drew behind me at his approach, he
added, half sneeringly,--'will _you_ come, chuck?  i'll not hurt you.  no!
to you i've made myself worse than the devil.  well, there is _one_ who
won't shrink from my company!  by god! she's relentless.  oh, damn it!
it's unutterably too much for flesh and blood to bear--even mine.'

he solicited the society of no one more.  at dusk he went into his
chamber.  through the whole night, and far into the morning, we heard him
groaning and 