

wuthering heights


chapter i


1801.--i have just returned from a visit to my landlord--the solitary
neighbour that i shall be troubled with.  this is certainly a beautiful
country!  in all england, i do not believe that i could have fixed on a
situation so completely removed from the stir of society.  a perfect
misanthropist's heaven: and mr. heathcliff and i are such a suitable pair
to divide the desolation between us.  a capital fellow!  he little
imagined how my heart warmed towards him when i beheld his black eyes
withdraw so suspiciously under their brows, as i rode up, and when his
fingers sheltered themselves, with a jealous resolution, still further in
his waistcoat, as i announced my name.

'mr. heathcliff?' i said.

a nod was the answer.

'mr. lockwood, your new tenant, sir.  i do myself the honour of calling
as soon as possible afte
 
 ___________________________
 
he grass grows
up between the flags, and cattle are the only hedge-cutters.'

joseph was an elderly, nay, an old man: very old, perhaps, though hale
and sinewy.  'the lord help us!' he soliloquised in an undertone of
peevish displeasure, while relieving me of my horse: looking, meantime,
in my face so sourly that i charitably conjectured he must have need of
divine aid to digest his dinner, and his pious ejaculation had no
reference to my unexpected advent.

wuthering heights is the name of mr. heathcliff's dwelling.  'wuthering'
being a significant provincial adjective, descriptive of the atmospheric
tumult to which its station is exposed in stormy weather.  pure, bracing
ventilation they must have up there at all times, indeed: one may guess
the power of the north wind blowing over the edge, by the excessive slant
of a few stunted firs at the end of the house; and by a range of gaunt
thorns all stretching their limbs one way, as if craving alms of the sun.
happily, the architect had foresight 
 
 ___________________________
 
y a swarm of squealing puppies; and other dogs haunted other
recesses.

the apartment and furniture would have been nothing extraordinary as
belonging to a homely, northern farmer, with a stubborn countenance, and
stalwart limbs set out to advantage in knee-breeches and gaiters.  such
an individual seated in his arm-chair, his mug of ale frothing on the
round table before him, is to be seen in any circuit of five or six miles
among these hills, if you go at the right time after dinner.  but mr.
heathcliff forms a singular contrast to his abode and style of living.  he
is a dark-skinned gipsy in aspect, in dress and manners a gentleman: that
is, as much a gentleman as many a country squire: rather slovenly,
perhaps, yet not looking amiss with his negligence, because he has an
erect and handsome figure; and rather morose.  possibly, some people
might suspect him of a degree of under-bred pride; i have a sympathetic
chord within that tells me it is nothing of the sort: i know, by
instinct, his rese
 
 ___________________________
 
rve springs from an aversion to showy displays of
feeling--to manifestations of mutual kindliness.  he'll love and hate
equally under cover, and esteem it a species of impertinence to be loved
or hated again.  no, i'm running on too fast: i bestow my own attributes
over-liberally on him.  mr. heathcliff may have entirely dissimilar
reasons for keeping his hand out of the way when he meets a would-be
acquaintance, to those which actuate me.  let me hope my constitution is
almost peculiar: my dear mother used to say i should never have a
comfortable home; and only last summer i proved myself perfectly unworthy
of one.

while enjoying a month of fine weather at the sea-coast, i was thrown
into the company of a most fascinating creature: a real goddess in my
eyes, as long as she took no notice of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ave gained the reputation of deliberate heartlessness; how
undeserved, i alone can appreciate.

i took a seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that towards which
my landlord advanced, and filled up an interval of silence by attempting
to caress the canine mother, who had left her nursery, and was sneaking
wolfishly to the back of my legs, her lip curled up, and her white teeth
watering for a snatch.  my caress provoked a long, guttural gnarl.

'you'd better let the dog alone,' growled mr. heathcliff in unison,
checking fiercer demonstrations with a punch of his foot.  'she's not
accustomed to be spoiled--not kept for a pet.'  then, striding to a side
door, he shouted again, 'joseph!'

joseph mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar, but gave no
intimation of ascending; so his master dived down to him, leaving me
_vis-a-vis_ the ruffianly bitch and a pair of grim shaggy sheep-dogs,
who shared with her a jealous guardianship over all my movements. not
anxious to come in contact with 
 
 ___________________________
 
 broke into a fury and leapt on my
knees. i flung her back, and hastened to interpose the table between us.
this proceeding aroused the whole hive: half-a-dozen four-footed fiends,
of various sizes and ages, issued from hidden dens to the common centre.
i felt my heels and coat-laps peculiar subjects of assault; and parrying
off the larger combatants as effectually as i could with the poker, i
was constrained to demand, aloud, assistance from some of the household
in re-establishing peace.

mr. heathcliff and his man climbed the cellar steps with vexatious
phlegm: i don't think they moved one second faster than usual, though
the hearth was an absolute tempest of worrying and yelping. happily, an
inhabitant of the kitchen made more despatch: a lusty dame, with
tucked-up gown, bare arms, and fire-flushed cheeks, rushed into the
midst of us flourishing a frying-pan: and used that weapon, and her
tongue, to such purpose, that the storm subsided magically, and she only
remained, heaving like a sea af
 
 ___________________________
 
t.

'what the devil, indeed!' i muttered.  'the herd of possessed swine could
have had no worse spirits in them than those animals of yours, sir.  you
might as well leave a stranger with a brood of tigers!'

'they won't meddle with persons who touch nothing,' he remarked, putting
the bottle before me, and restoring the displaced table.  'the dogs do
right to be vigilant.  take a glass of wine?'

'no, thank you.'

'not bitten, are you?'

'if i had been, i would have set my signet on the biter.'  heathcliff's
countenance relaxed into a grin.

'come, come,' he said, 'you are flurried, mr. lockwood.  here, take a
little wine.  guests are so exceedingly rare in this house that i and my
dogs, i am willing to own, hardly know how to receive them.  your health,
sir?'

i bowed and returned the pledge; beginning to perceive that it would be
foolish to sit sulking for the misbehaviour of a pack of curs; besides, i
felt loth to yield the fellow further amusement at my expense; since his
humour took that tur
 
 ___________________________
 
 o'clock; the housekeeper, a matronly lady, taken as a fixture
along with the house, could not, or would not, comprehend my request that
i might be served at five)--on mounting the stairs with this lazy
intention, and stepping into the room, i saw a servant-girl on her knees
surrounded by brushes and coal-scuttles, and raising an infernal dust as
she extinguished the flames with heaps of cinders.  this spectacle drove
me back immediately; i took my hat, and, after a four-miles' walk,
arrived at heathcliff's garden-gate just in time to escape the first
feathery flakes of a snow-shower.

on that bleak hill-top the earth was hard with a black frost, and the air
made me shiver through every limb.  being unable to remove the chain, i
jumped over, and, running up the flagged causeway bordered with
straggling gooseberry-bushes, knocked vainly for admittance, till my
knuckles tingled and the dogs howled.

'wretched inmates!' i ejaculated, mentally, 'you deserve perpetual
isolation from your species for 
 
 ___________________________
 
, warm, cheerful
apartment where i was formerly received.  it glowed delightfully in the
radiance of an immense fire, compounded of coal, peat, and wood; and near
the table, laid for a plentiful evening meal, i was pleased to observe
the 'missis,' an individual whose existence i had never previously
suspected.  i bowed and waited, thinking she would bid me take a seat.
she looked at me, leaning back in her chair, and remained motionless and
mute.

'rough weather!' i remarked.  'i'm afraid, mrs. heathcliff, the door must
bear the consequence of your servants' leisure attendance: i had hard
work to make them hear me.'

she never opened her mouth.  i stared--she stared also: at any rate, she
kept her eyes on me in a cool, regardless manner, exceedingly
embarrassing and disagreeable.

'sit down,' said the young man, gruffly.  'he'll be in soon.'

i obeyed; and hemmed, and called the villain juno, who deigned, at this
second interview, to move the extreme tip of her tail, in token of owning
my acquai
 
 ___________________________
 
ntance.

'a beautiful animal!' i commenced again.  'do you intend parting with the
little ones, madam?'

'they are not mine,' said the amiable hostess, more repellingly than
heathcliff himself could have replied.

'ah, your favourites are among these?' i continued, turning to an obscure
cushion full of something like cats.

'a strange choice of favourites!' she observed scornfully.

unluckily, it was a heap of dead rabbits.  i hemmed once more, and drew
closer to the hearth, repeating my comment on the wildness of the
evening.

'you should not have come out,' she said, rising and reaching from the
chimney-piece two of the painted canisters.

her position before was sheltered 
 
 ___________________________
 
ir in a pet;
her forehead corrugated, and her red under-lip pushed out, like a child's
ready to cry.

meanwhile, the young man had slung on to his person a decidedly shabby
upper garment, and, erecting himself before the blaze, looked down on me
from the corner of his eyes, for all the world as if there were some
mortal feud unavenged between us.  i began to doubt whether he were a
servant or not: his dress and speech were both rude, entirely devoid of
the superiority observable in mr. and mrs. heathcliff; his thick brown
curls were rough and uncultivated, his whiskers encroached bearishly over
his cheeks, and his hands were embrowned like those of a common labourer:
still his bearing was free, almost haughty, and he showed none of a
domestic's assiduity in attending on the lady of the house.  in the
absence of clear proofs of his condition, i deemed it best to abstain
from noticing his curious conduct; and, five minutes afterwards, the
entrance of heathcliff relieved me, in some measure, from m
 
 ___________________________
 
liar with these moors often miss their road on such evenings; and i
can tell you there is no chance of a change at present.'

'perhaps i can get a guide among your lads, and he might stay at the
grange till morning--could you spare me one?'

'no, i could not.'

'oh, indeed!  well, then, i must trust to my own sagacity.'

'umph!'

'are you going to mak' the tea?' demanded he of the shabby coat, shifting
his ferocious gaze from me to the young lady.

'is _he_ to have any?' she asked, appealing to heathcliff.

'get it ready, will you?' was the answer, uttered so savagely that i
started.  the tone in which the words were said revealed a genuine bad
nature.  i no longer felt inclined to call heathcliff a capital fellow.
when the preparations were finished, he invited me with--'now, sir, bring
forward your chair.'  and we all, including the rustic youth, drew round
the table: an austere silence prevailing while we discussed our meal.

i thought, if i had caused the cloud, it was my duty to make an eff
 
 ___________________________
 
ort to
dispel it.  they could not every day sit so grim and taciturn; and it was
impossible, however ill-tempered they might be, that the universal scowl
they wore was their every-day countenance.

'it is strange,' i began, in the interval of swallowing one cup of tea
and receiving another--'it is strange how custom can mould our tastes and
ideas: many could not imagine the existence of happiness in a life of
such complete exile from the world as you spend, mr. heathcliff; yet,
i'll venture to say, that, surrounded by your family, and with your
amiable lady as the presiding genius over your home and heart--'

'my amiable lady!' he interrupted, with an almost diabolical sneer on his
face.  'where is she--my amiable lady?'

'mrs. heathcliff, your wife, i mean.'

'well, yes--oh, you would intimate that her spirit has taken the post of
ministering angel, and guards the fortunes of wuthering heights, even
when her body is gone.  is that it?'

perceiving myself in a b
 
 ___________________________
 
might have
seen there was too great a disparity between the ages of the parties to
make it likely that they were man and wife.  one was about forty: a
period of mental vigour at which men seldom cherish the delusion of being
married for love by girls: that dream is reserved for the solace of our
declining years.  the other did not look seventeen.

then it flashed upon me--'the clown at my elbow, who is drinking his tea
out of a basin and eating his bread with unwashed hands, may be her
husband: heathcliff junior, of course.  here is the consequence of being
buried alive: she has thrown herself away upon that boor from sheer
ignorance that better individuals existed!  a sad pity--i must beware how
i cause her to regret her choice.'  the last reflection may seem
conceited; it was not.  my neighbour struck me as bordering on repulsive;
i knew, through experience, that i was tolerably attractive.

'mrs. heathcliff is my daughter-in-law,' said heathcliff, corroborating
my surmise.  he turned, as he s
 
 ___________________________
 
mson, and clenched his
fist, with every appearance of a meditated assault.  but he seemed to
recollect himself presently, and smothered the storm in a brutal curse,
muttered on my behalf: which, however, i took care not to notice.

'unhappy in your conjectures, sir,' observed my host; 'we neither of us
have the privilege of owning your good fairy; her mate is dead.  i said
she was my daughter-in-law: therefore, she must have married my son.'

'and this young man is--'

'not my son, assuredly.'

heathcliff smiled again, as if it were rather too bold a jest to
attribute the paternity of that bear to him.

'my name is hareton earnshaw,' growled the other; 'and i'd counsel you to
respect it!'

'i've shown no disrespect,' was my reply, laughing internally at the
dignity with which he announced himself.

he fixed his eye on me longer than i cared to return the stare, for fear
i might be tempted either to box his ears or render my hilarity audible.
i began to feel unmistakably out of place in that plea
 
 ___________________________
 
the weather.  a
sorrowful sight i saw: dark night coming down prematurely, and sky and
hills mingled in one bitter whirl of wind and suffocating snow.

'i don't think it possible for me to get home now without a guide,' i
could not help exclaiming.  'the roads will be buried already; and, if
they were bare, i could scarcely distinguish a foot in advance.'

'hareton, drive those dozen sheep into the barn porch.  they'll be
covered if left in the fold all night: and put a plank before them,' said
heathcliff.

'how must i do?' i continued, with rising irritation.

there was no reply to my question; and on looking round i saw only joseph
bringing in a pail of porridge for the dogs, and mrs. heathcliff leaning
over the fire, diverting herself with burning a bundle of matches which
had fallen from the chimney-piece as she restored the tea-canister to its
place.  the former, when he had deposited his burden, took a critical
survey of the room, and in cracked tones grated out--'aw wonder how yah
can fai
 
 ___________________________
 
shion to stand thear i' idleness un war, when all on 'ems goan
out!  bud yah're a nowt, and it's no use talking--yah'll niver mend o'yer
ill ways, but goa raight to t' divil, like yer mother afore ye!'

i imagined, for a moment, that this piece of eloquence was addressed to
me; and, sufficiently enraged, stepped towards the aged rascal with an
intention of kicking him out of the door.  mrs. heathcliff, however,
checked me by her answer.

'you scandalous old hypocrite!' she replied.  'are you not afraid of
being carried away bodily, whenever you mention the devil's name?  i warn
you to refrain from provoking me, or i'll ask your abduction as a special
favour!  stop! look here, joseph,' she continued, taking a long, dark
book from a shelf; 'i'll show you how far i've progressed in the black
art: i shall soon be competent to make a clear house of it.  the red cow
didn't die by chance; and your 
 
 ___________________________
 
riously!
i'll have you all modelled in wax and clay! and the first who passes the
limits i fix shall--i'll not say what he shall be done to--but, you'll
see!  go, i'm looking at you!'

the little witch put a mock malignity into her beautiful eyes, and
joseph, trembling with sincere horror, hurried out, praying, and
ejaculating 'wicked' as he went.  i thought her conduct must be prompted
by a species of dreary fun; and, now that we were alone, i endeavoured to
interest her in my distress.

'mrs. heathcliff,' i said earnestly, 'you must excuse me for troubling
you.  i presume, because, with that face, i'm sure you cannot help being
good-hearted.  do point out some landmarks by which i may know my way
home: i have no more idea how to get there than you would have how to get
to london!'

'take the road you came,' she answered, ensconcing herself in a chair,
with a candle, and the long book open before her.  'it is brief advice,
but as sound as i can give.'

'then, if you hear of me being discovered 
 
 ___________________________
 
dead in a bog or a pit full of
snow, your conscience won't whisper that it is partly your fault?'

'how so?  i cannot escort you.  they wouldn't let me go to the end of the
garden wall.'

'_you_!  i should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold, for my
convenience, on such a night,' i cried.  'i want you to tell me my way,
not to _show_ it: or else to persuade mr. heathcliff to give me a guide.'

'who?  there is himself, earnshaw, zillah, joseph and i.  which would you
have?'

'are there no boys at the farm?'

'no; those are all.'

'then, it follows that i am compelled to stay.'

'that you may settle with your host.  i have nothing to do with it.'

'i hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more rash journeys on these
hills,' cried heathcliff's stern voice from the kitchen entrance.  'as to
staying here, i don't keep accommodations for visitors: you must share a
 
 ___________________________
 
te.  it was so dark that i could not see the means of exit; and, as
i wandered round, i heard another specimen of their civil behaviour
amongst each other.  at first the young man appeared about to befriend
me.

'i'll go with him as far as the park,' he said.

'you'll go with him to hell!' exclaimed his master, or whatever relation
he bore.  'and who is to look after the horses, eh?'

'a man's life is of more consequence than one evening's neglect of the
horses: somebody must go,' murmured mrs. heathcliff, more kindly than i
expected.

'not at your command!' retorted hareton.  'if you set store on him, you'd
better be quiet.'

'then i hope his ghost will haunt you; and i hope mr. heathcliff will
never get another tenant till the grange is a ruin,' she answered,
sharply.

'hearken, hearken, shoo's cursing on 'em!' muttered joseph, towards whom
i had been steering.

he sat within earshot, milking the cows by the light of a lantern, which
i seized unceremoniously, and, calling out that i would send
 
 ___________________________
 
 it back on
the morrow, rushed to the nearest postern.

'maister, maister, he's staling t' lanthern!' shouted the ancient,
pursuing my retreat.  'hey, gnasher!  hey, dog!  hey wolf, holld him,
holld him!'

on opening the little door, two hairy monsters flew at my throat, bearing
me down, and extinguishing the light; while a mingled guffaw from
heathcliff and hareton put the copestone on my rage and humiliation.
fortunately, the beasts seemed more bent on stretching their paws, and
yawning, and flourishing their tails, than devouring me alive; but they
would suffer no resurrection, and i was forced to lie till their
malignant masters pleased to deliver me: then, hatless and trembling with
wrath, i ordered the miscreants to let me out--on their peril to keep me
one minute longer--with several incoherent threats of retaliation that,
in their indef
 
 ___________________________
 
inite depth of virulency, smacked of king lear.

the vehemence of my agitation brought on a copious bleeding at the nose,
and still heathcliff laughed, and still i scolded.  i don't know what
would have concluded the scene, had there not been one person at hand
rather more rational than myself, and more benevolent than my
entertainer.  this was zillah, the stout housewife; who at length issued
forth to inquire into the nature of the uproar.  she thought that some of
them had been laying violent hands on me; and, not daring to attack her
master, she turned her vocal artillery against the younger scoundrel.

'well, mr. earnshaw,' she cr
 
 ___________________________
 
ied, 'i wonder what you'll have agait next?
are we going to murder folk on our very door-stones?  i see this house
will never do for me--look at t' poor lad, he's fair choking!  wisht,
wisht; you mun'n't go on so.  come in, and i'll cure that: there now,
hold ye still.'

with these words she suddenly splashed a pint of icy water down my neck,
and pulled me into the kitchen.  mr. heathcliff followed, his accidental
merriment expiring quickly in his habitual moroseness.

i was sick exceedingly, and dizzy, and faint; and thus compelled perforce
to accept lodgings under his roof.  he told zillah to give me a glass of
brandy, and then passed on to the inner room; while she condoled with me
on my sorry predicament, and having obeyed his orders, whereby i was
somewhat revived, ushered me to bed.




chapter iii


while leading the way upstairs, she recommended that i should hide the
can
 
 ___________________________
 
es cut out near the top resembling coach
windows.  having approached this structure, i looked inside, and
perceived it to be a singular sort of old-fashioned couch, very
conveniently designed to obviate the necessity for every member of the
family having a room to himself.  in fact, it formed a little closet, and
the ledge of a window, which it enclosed, served as a table.  i slid back
the panelled sides, got in with my light, pulled them together again, and
felt secure against the vigilance of heathcliff, and every one else.

the ledge, where i placed my candle, had a few mildewed books piled up in
one corner; and it was covered with writing scratched on the paint.  this
writing, however, was nothing but a name repeated in all kinds of
characters, large and small--_catherine earnshaw_, here and there varied
to _catherine heathcliff_, and then again to _catherine linton_.

in vapid listlessness i leant my head against the window, and continued
spelling over catherine earnshaw--heathcliff--linton
 
 ___________________________
 
 scrawled in an unformed, childish
hand.  at the top of an extra page (quite a treasure, probably, when
first lighted on) i was greatly amused to behold an excellent caricature
of my friend joseph,--rudely, yet powerfully sketched.  an immediate
interest kindled within me for the unknown catherine, and i began
forthwith to decipher her faded hieroglyphics.

'an awful sunday,' commenced the paragraph beneath.  'i wish my father
were back again.  hindley is a detestable substitute--his conduct to
heathcliff is atrocious--h. and i are going to rebel--we took our
initiatory step this evening.

'all day had been flooding with rain; we could not go to church, so
joseph must needs get up a congregation in the garret; and, while hindley
and his wife basked downstairs before a comfortable fire--doing anything
but reading their bibles, i'll answer for it--heathcliff, myself, and the
unhappy ploughboy were commanded to take our prayer-books, and mount: we
were ranged in a row, on a sack of corn, groaning a
 
 ___________________________
 
red, und t' sound o'
t' gospel still i' yer lugs, and ye darr be laiking!  shame on ye! sit ye
down, ill childer! there's good books eneugh if ye'll read 'em: sit ye
down, and think o' yer sowls!"

'saying this, he compelled us so to square our positions that we might
receive from the far-off fire a dull ray to show us the text of the
lumber he thrust upon us.  i could not bear the employment.  i took my
dingy volume by the scroop, and hurled it into the dog-kennel, vowing i
hated a good book.  heathcliff kicked his to the same place.  then there
was a hubbub!

'"maister hindley!" shouted our chaplain.  "maister, coom hither!  miss
cathy's riven th' back off 'th' helmet o' salvation,' un' heathcliff's
pawsed his fit into t' first part o' 't' brooad way to destruction!'  it's
fair flaysome that ye let 'em go on this gait.  ech! th' owd man wad ha'
laced 'em properly--but he's goan!"

'hindley hurried up from his paradise on the hearth, and seizing one of
us by the collar, and the other by the arm
 
 ___________________________
 
 a scamper on the moors, under its shelter. a pleasant
suggestion--and then, if the surly old man come in, he may believe his
prophecy verified--we cannot be damper, or colder, in the rain than we
are here.'

* * * * * *

i suppose catherine fulfilled her project, for the next sentence took up
another subject: she waxed lachrymose.

'how little did i dream that hindley would ever make me cry so!' she
wrote.  'my head aches, till i cannot keep it on the pillow; and still i
can't give over.  poor heathcliff!  hindley calls him a vagabond, and
won't let him sit with us, nor eat with us any more; and, he says, he and
i must not play together, and threatens to turn him out of the house if
we break his orders.  he has been blaming our father (how dared he?) for
treating h. too liberally; and swears he will reduce him to his right
place--'

* * * * * *

i began to nod drowsily over the dim page: my eye wandered from
manuscript to print.  i saw a red ornamented title--'seventy times seven,
and the first
 
 ___________________________
 
y of fright.  to my
confusion, i discovered the yell was not ideal: hasty footsteps
approached my chamber door; somebody pushed it open, with a vigorous
hand, and a light glimmered through the squares at the top of the bed.  i
sat shuddering yet, and wiping the perspiration from my forehead: the
intruder appeared to hesitate, and muttered to himself.  at last, he
said, in a half-whisper, plainly not expecting an answer, 'is any one
here?'  i considered it best to confess my presence; for i knew
heathcliff's accents, and feared he might search further, if i kept
quiet.  with this intention, i turned and opened the panels.  i shall not
soon forget the effect my action produced.

heathcliff stood near the entrance, in his shirt and trousers; with a
candle dripping over his fingers, and his face as white as the wall
behind him.  the first creak of the oak startled him like an electric
shock: the light leaped from his hold to a distance of some feet, and his
agitation was so extreme, that he could ha
 
 ___________________________
 
!  i wish you were at the--' commenced
my host, setting the candle on a chair, because he found it impossible to
hold it steady.  'and who showed you up into this room?' he continued,
crushing his nails into his palms, and grinding his teeth to subdue the
maxillary convulsions.  'who was it?  i've a good mind to turn them out
of the house this moment?'

'it was your servant zillah,' i replied, flinging myself on to the floor,
and rapidly resuming my garments.  'i should not care if you did, mr.
heathcliff; she richly deserves it.  i suppose that she wanted to get
another proof that the place was haunted, at my expense.  well, it
is--swarming with ghosts and goblins!  you have reason in shutting it up,
i assure you.  no one will thank you for a doze in such a den!'

'what do you mean?' asked heathcliff, 'and what are you doing?  lie down
and finish out the night, since you _are_ here; but, for heaven's sake!
don't repeat that horrid noise: nothing could excuse it, unless you were
having your thro
 
 ___________________________
 
d me!' i returned.  'i'm not going to endure the persecutions of
your hospitable ancestors again.  was not the reverend jabez branderham
akin to you on the mother's side?  and that minx, catherine linton, or
earnshaw, or however she was called--she must have been a
changeling--wicked little soul!  she told me she had been walking the
earth these twenty years: a just punishment for her mortal
transgressions, i've no doubt!'

scarcely were these words uttered when i recollected the association of
heathcliff's with catherine's name in the book, which had completely
slipped from my memory, till thus awakened.  i blushed at my
inconsideration: but, without showing further consciousness of the
offence, i hastened to add--'the truth is, sir, i passed the first part
of the night in--'  here i stopped afresh--i was about to say 'perusing
those old volumes,' then it would have revealed my knowledge of their
written, as well as their printed, contents; so, correcting myself, i
went on--'in spelling over th
 
 ___________________________
 
e name scratched on that window-ledge.  a
monotonous occupation, calculated to set me asleep, like counting, or--'

'what _can_ you mean by talking in this way to _me_!' thundered
heathcliff with savage vehemence.  'how--how _dare_ you, under my
roof?--god! he's mad to speak so!'  and he struck his forehead with rage.

i did not know whether to resent this language or pursue my explanation;
but he seemed so powerfully affected that i took pity and proceeded with
my dreams; affirming i had never heard the appellation of 'catherine
linton' before, but reading it often over produced an impression which
personified itself when i had no longer my imagination under control.
heathcliff gr
 
 ___________________________
 
from his eyes.  'mr. lockwood,' he added, 'you may go into my room:
you'll only be in the way, coming down-stairs so early: and your childish
outcry has sent sleep to the devil for me.'

'and for me, too,' i replied.  'i'll walk in the yard till daylight, and
then i'll be off; and you need not dread a repetition of my intrusion.
i'm now quite cured of seeking pleasure in society, be it country or
town.  a sensible man ought to find sufficient company in himself.'

'delightful company!' muttered heathcliff.  'take the candle, and go
where you please.  i shall join you directly.  keep out of the yard,
though, the dogs are unchained; and the house--juno mounts sentinel
there, and--nay, you can only ramble about the steps and passages.  but,
away with you!  i'll come in two minutes!'

i obeyed, so far as to quit the chamber; when, ignorant where the narrow
lobbies led, i stood still, and was witness, involuntarily, to a piece of
superstition on the part of my landlord which belied, oddly, his appare
 
 ___________________________
 
f
exchanging civilities with me as with my companion the cat.  i guessed,
by his preparations, that egress was allowed, and, leaving my hard couch,
made a movement to follow him.  he noticed this, and thrust at an inner
door with the end of his spade, intimating by an inarticulate sound that
there was the place where i must go, if i changed my locality.

it opened into the house, where the females were already astir; zillah
urging flakes of flame up the chimney with a colossal bellows; and mrs.
heathcliff, kneeling on the hearth, reading a book by the aid of the
blaze.  she held her hand interposed between the furnace-heat and her
eyes, and seemed absorbed in her occupation; desisting from it only to
chide the servant for covering her with sparks, or to push away a dog,
now and then, that snoozled its nose overforwardly into her face.  i was
surprised to see heathcliff there also.  he stood by the fire, his back
towards me, just finishing a stormy scene with poor zillah; who ever and
anon interr
 
 ___________________________
 
nted by a dash--.  'there you are, at your idle
tricks again!  the rest of them do earn their bread--you live on my
charity!  put your trash away, and find something to do.  you shall pay
me for the plague of having you eternally in my sight--do you hear,
damnable jade?'

'i'll put my trash away, because you can make me if i refuse,' answered
the young lady, closing her book, and throwing it on a chair.  'but i'll
not do anything, though you should swear your tongue out, except what i
please!'

heathcliff lifted his hand, and the speaker sprang to a safer distance,
obviously acquainted with its weight.  having no desire to be entertained
by a cat-and-dog combat, i stepped forward briskly, as if eager to
partake the warmth of the hearth, and innocent of any knowledge of the
interrupted dispute.  each had enough decorum to suspend further
hostilities: heathcliff placed his fists, out of temptation, in his
pockets; mrs. heathcliff curled her lip, and walked to a seat far off,
where she kept her wor
 
 ___________________________
 
aculated--'ah, times are greatly
changed since then!'

'yes,' i remarked, 'you've seen a good many alterations, i suppose?'

'i have: and troubles too,' she said.

'oh, i'll turn the talk on my landlord's family!' i thought to myself.  'a
good subject to start!  and that pretty girl-widow, i should like to know
her history: whether she be a native of the country, or, as is more
probable, an exotic that the surly _indigenae_ will not recognise for
kin.'  with this intention i asked mrs. dean why heathcliff let
thrushcross grange, and preferred living in a situation and residence so
much inferior.  'is he not rich enough to keep the estate in good order?'
i inquired.

'rich, sir!' she returned.  'he has nobody knows what money, and every
year it increases.  yes, yes, he's rich enough to live in a finer house
than this: but he's very near--close-handed; and, if he had meant to flit
to thrushcross grange, as soon as he heard of a good tenant he could not
have borne to miss the chance of getting a fe
 
 ___________________________
 
w hundreds more.  it is
strange people should be so greedy, when they are alone in the world!'

'he had a son, it seems?'

'yes, he had one--he is dead.'

'and that young lady, mrs. heathcliff, is his widow?'

'yes.'

'where did she come from originally?'

'why, sir, she is my late master's daughter: catherine linton was her
maiden name.  i nursed her, poor thing!  i did wish mr. heathcliff would
remove here, and then we might have been together again.'

'what!  catherine linton?' i exclaimed, astonished.  but a minute's
reflection convinced me it was not my ghostly catherine.  'then,' i
continued, 'my predecessor's name was linton?'

'it was.'

'and who is that earnshaw: hareton earnshaw, who lives with mr.
heathcliff?  are they relations?'

'no; he is the late mrs. linton's nephew.'

'the young lady's cousin, then?'

'yes; and her husband was her cousin also: one on the mother's
 
 ___________________________
 
, the other
on the father's side: heathcliff married mr. linton's sister.'

'i see the house at wuthering heights has "earnshaw" carved over the
front door.  are they an old family?'

'very old, sir; and hareton is the last of them, as our miss cathy is of
us--i mean, of the lintons.  have you been to wuthering heights?  i beg
pardon for asking; but i should like to hear how she is!'

'mrs. heathcliff? she looked very well, and very handsome; yet, i think,
not very happy.'

'oh dear, i don't wonder!  and how did you like the master?'

'a rough fellow, rather, mrs. dean.  is not that his character?

'rough as a saw-edge, and hard as whinstone!  the less you meddle with
him the better.'

'he must have had some ups and downs in life to make him such a churl.  do
you know anything of his history?'

'it's a cuckoo's, sir--i know all about it: except where he was born, and
who were his parents, an
 
 ___________________________
 
, to teach her cleaner manners. they
entirely refused to have it in bed with them, or even in their room; and
i had no more sense, so i put it on the landing of the stairs, hoping it
might be gone on the morrow. by chance, or else attracted by hearing his
voice, it crept to mr. earnshaw's door, and there he found it on
quitting his chamber. inquiries were made as to how it got there; i was
obliged to confess, and in recompense for my cowardice and inhumanity
was sent out of the house.

this was heathcliff's first introduction to the family.  on coming back a
few days afterwards (for i did not consider my banishment perpetual), i
found they had christened him 'heathcliff': it was the name of a son who
died in childhood, and it has served him ever since, both for christian
and surname.  miss cathy and he were now very thick; but hindley hated
him: and to say the truth i did the same; and we plagued and went on with
him shamefully: for i wasn't reasonable enough to feel my injustice, and
the mistre
 
 ___________________________
 
ss never put in a word on his behalf when she saw him wronged.

he seemed a sullen, patient child; hardened, perhaps, to ill-treatment:
he would stand hindley's blows without winking or shedding a tear, and my
pinches moved him only to draw in a breath and open his eyes, as if he
had hurt himself by accident, and nobody was to blame.  this endurance
made old earnshaw furious, when he discovered his son persecuting the
poor fatherless child, as he called him.  he took to heathcliff
strangely, believing all he said (for that matter, he said precious
little, and generally the truth), and petting him up far above cathy, who
was too mischievous and wayward for a favourite.

so, from the very beginning, he bred bad feeling in the house; and at
mrs. earnshaw's death, which happened in less than two years after, the
young master had learned to regard his father as an oppressor rather than
a friend, and heathcliff as a usurper of his parent's affections and his
privileges; and he
 
 ___________________________
 
 grew bitter with brooding over these injuries.  i
sympathised a while; but when the children fell ill of the measles, and i
had to tend them, and take on me the cares of a woman at once, i changed
my idea.  heathcliff was dangerously sick; and while he lay at the worst
he would have me constantly by his pillow: i suppose he felt i did a good
deal for him, and he hadn't wit to guess that i was compelled to do it.
however, i will say this, he was the quietest child that ever nurse
watched over.  the difference between him and the others forced me to be
less partial.  cathy and her brother harassed me terribly: he was as
uncomplaining as a lamb; though hardness, not gentleness, made him give
little trouble.

he
 
 ___________________________
 
 got through, and the doctor affirmed it was in a great measure owing
to me, and praised me for my care.  i was vain of his commendations, and
softened towards the being by whose means i earned them, and thus hindley
lost his last ally: still i couldn't dote on heathcliff, and i wondered
often what my master saw to admire so much in the sullen boy; who never,
to my recollection, repaid his indulgence by any sign of gratitude.  he
was not insolent to his benefactor, he was simply insensible; though
knowing perfectly the hold he had on his heart, and conscious he had only
to speak and all the house would be obliged to bend to his wishes.  as an
instance, i remember mr. earnshaw once bought a couple of colts at the
parish fair, and gave the lads each one.  heathcli
 
 ___________________________
 
staggered up immediately, breathless and white; and, had not i
prevented it, he would have gone just so to the master, and got full
revenge by letting his condition plead for him, intimating who had caused
it.  'take my colt, gipsy, then!' said young earnshaw.  'and i pray that
he may break your neck: take him, and be damned, you beggarly interloper!
and wheedle my father out of all he has: only afterwards show him what
you are, imp of satan.--and take that, i hope he'll kick out your
brains!'

heathcliff had gone to loose the beast, and shift it to his own stall; he
was passing behind it, when hindley finished his speech by knocking him
under its feet, and without stopping to examine whether his hopes were
fulfilled, ran away as fast as he could.  i was surprised to witness how
coolly the child gathered himself up, and went on with his intention;
exchanging saddles and all, and then sitting down on a bundle of hay to
overcome the qualm which the violent blow occasioned, before he entered
the ho
 
 ___________________________
 
. earnshaw began to fail. he had been active and
healthy, yet his strength left him suddenly; and when he was confined to
the chimney-corner he grew grievously irritable. a nothing vexed him;
and suspected slights of his authority nearly threw him into fits. this
was especially to be remarked if any one attempted to impose upon, or
domineer over, his favourite: he was painfully jealous lest a word
should be spoken amiss to him; seeming to have got into his head the
notion that, because he liked heathcliff, all hated, and longed to do
him an ill-turn. it was a disadvantage to the lad; for the kinder among
us did not wish to fret the master, so we humoured his partiality; and
that humouring was rich nourishment to the child's pride and black
tempers. still it became in a manner necessary; twice, or thrice,
hindley's manifestation of scorn, while his father was near, roused the
old man to a fury: he seized his stick to strike him, and shook with
rage that he could not do it.

at last, our curate (w
 
 ___________________________
 
sacked a bible to rake the promises to himself and
fling the curses to his neighbours.  by his knack of sermonising and
pious discoursing, he contrived to make a great impression on mr.
earnshaw; and the more feeble the master became, the more influence he
gained.  he was relentless in worrying him about his soul's concerns, and
about ruling his children rigidly.  he encouraged him to regard hindley
as a reprobate; and, night after night, he regularly grumbled out a long
string of tales against heathcliff and catherine: always minding to
flatter earnshaw's weakness by heaping the heaviest blame on the latter.

certainly she had ways with her such as i never saw a child take up
before; and she put all of us past our patience fifty times and oftener
in a day: from the hour she came down-stairs till the hour she went to
bed, we had not a minute's security that she wouldn't be in mischief.  her
spirits were always at high-water mark, her tongue always going--singing,
laughing, and plaguing everybody
 
 ___________________________
 
 who would not do the same.  a wild,
wicked slip she was--but she had the bonniest eye, the sweetest smile,
and lightest foot in the parish: and, after all, i believe she meant no
harm; for when once she made you cry in good earnest, it seldom happened
that she would not keep you company, and oblige you to be quiet that you
might comfort her.  she was much too fond of heathcliff.  the greatest
punishment we could invent for her was to keep her separate from him: yet
she got chided more than any of us on his account.  in play, she liked
exceedingly to act the little mistress; using her hands freely, and
commanding her companions: she did so to me, but i would not bear
slapping and ordering; and so i let her know.

now, mr. earnshaw did not understand jokes from his children: he had
always been strict and grave with them; and catherine, on her part, had
no idea why her f
 
 ___________________________
 
ather should be crosser and less patient in his ailing
condition than he was in his prime.  his peevish reproofs wakened in her
a naughty delight to provoke him: she was never so happy as when we were
all scolding her at once, and she defying us with her bold, saucy look,
and her ready words; turning joseph's religious curses into ridicule,
baiting me, and doing just what her father hated most--showing how her
pretended insolence, which he thought real, had more power over
heathcliff than his kindness: how the boy would do _her_ bidding in
anything, and _his_ only when it suited his own inclination.  after
behaving as badly as possible all day, she sometimes came fondling to
make it up at night.  'nay, cathy,' the old man would say, 'i cannot love
thee, thou'rt worse than thy brother.  go, say thy prayers, child, and
ask god's pardon.  i doubt thy mother and i must rue that we ever reared
thee!'  that made her cry, at first; and then being repulsed continually
hardened her,
 
 ___________________________
 
n earth.
he died quietly in his chair one october evening, seated by the
fire-side.  a high wind blustered round the house, and roared in the
chimney: it sounded wild and stormy, yet it was not cold, and we were all
together--i, a little removed from the hearth, busy at my knitting, and
joseph reading his bible near the table (for the servants generally sat
in the house then, after their work was done).  miss cathy had been sick,
and that made her still; she leant against her father's knee, and
heathcliff was lying on the floor with his head in her lap.  i remember
the master, before he fell into a doze, stroking her bonny hair--it
pleased him rarely to see her gentle--and saying, 'why canst thou not
always be a good lass, cathy?'  and she turned her face up to his, and
laughed, and answered, 'why cannot you always be a good man, father?'  but
as soon as she saw him vexed again, she kissed his hand, and said she
would sing him to sleep.  she began singing very low, till his fingers
dropped from 
 
 ___________________________
 
uched his shoulder; but he would not move: so he took the candle
and looked at him.  i thought there was something wrong as he set down
the light; and seizing the children each by an arm, whispered them to
'frame up-stairs, and make little din--they might pray alone that
evening--he had summut to do.'

'i shall bid father good-night first,' said catherine, putting her arms
round his neck, before we could hinder her.  the poor thing discovered
her loss directly--she screamed out--'oh, he's dead, heathcliff! he's
dead!'  and they both set up a heart-breaking cry.

i joined my wail to theirs, loud and bitter; but joseph asked what we
could be thinking of to roar in that way over a saint in heaven.  he told
me to put on my cloak and run to gimmerton for the doctor and the parson.
i could not guess the use that either would be of, then.  however, i
went, through wind and rain, and brought one, the doctor, back with me;
the other said he would come in the morning.  leaving joseph to explain
matters, i
 
 ___________________________
 
g-kennel, and the wide space there was to move about in
where they usually sat, that he thought it unnecessary to her comfort,
and so dropped the intention.

she expressed pleasure, too, at finding a sister among her new
acquaintance; and she prattled to catherine, and kissed her, and ran
about with her, and gave her quantities of presents, at the beginning.
her affection tired very soon, however, and when she grew peevish,
hindley became tyrannical.  a few words from her, evincing a dislike to
heathcliff, were enough to rouse in him all his old hatred of the boy.  he
drove him from their company to the servants, deprived him of the
instructions of the curate, and insisted that he should labour out of
doors instead; compelling him to do so as hard as any other lad on the
farm.

heathcliff bore his degradation pretty well at first, because cathy
taught him what she learnt, and worked or played with him in the fields.
they both promised fair to grow up as rude as savages; the young master
being en
 
 ___________________________
 
tirely negligent how they behaved, and what they did, so they
kept clear of him.  he would not even have seen after their going to
church on sundays, only joseph and the curate reprimanded his
carelessness when they absented themselves; and that reminded him to
order heathcliff a flogging, and catherine a fast from dinner or supper.
but it was one of their chief amusements to run away to the moors in the
morning and remain there all day, and the after punishment grew a mere
thing to laugh at.  the curate might set as many chapters as he pleased
for catherine to get by heart, and joseph might thrash heathcliff till
his arm ached; they forgot everything the minute they were together
again: at least the minute they had contrived some naughty plan of
revenge; and many a t
 
 ___________________________
 
 passion told us to bolt the doors, and swore
nobody should let them in that night.  the household went to bed; and i,
too, anxious to lie down, opened my lattice and put my head out to
hearken, though it rained: determined to admit them in spite of the
prohibition, should they return.  in a while, i distinguished steps
coming up the road, and the light of a lantern glimmered through the
gate.  i threw a shawl over my head and ran to prevent them from waking
mr. earnshaw by knocking.  there was heathcliff, by himself: it gave me a
start to see him alone.

'where is miss catherine?' i cried hurriedly. 'no accident, i hope?' 'at
thrushcross grange,' he answered; 'and i would have been there too, but
they had not the manners to ask me to stay.' 'well, you will catch it!'
i said: 'you'll never be content till you're sent about your business.
what in the world led you wandering to thrushcross grange?' 'let me get
off my wet clothes, and i'll tell you all about it, nelly,' he replied.
i bid him beware
 
 ___________________________
 
 we
did despise them! when would you catch me wishing to have what catherine
wanted? or find us by ourselves, seeking entertainment in yelling, and
sobbing, and rolling on the ground, divided by the whole room? i'd not
exchange, for a thousand lives, my condition here, for edgar linton's at
thrushcross grange--not if i might have the privilege of flinging joseph
off the highest gable, and painting the house-front with hindley's
blood!'

'hush, hush!' i interrupted.  'still you have not told me, heathcliff,
how catherine is left behind?'

'i told you we laughed,' he answered. 'the lintons heard us, and with
one accord they shot like arrows to the door; there was silence, and
then a cry, "oh, mamma, mamma! oh, papa! oh, mamma, come here. oh, papa,
oh!" they really did howl out something in that way. we made frightful
noises to terrify them still more, and then we dropped off the ledge,
because somebody was drawing the bars, and we felt we had better flee. i
had cathy by the hand, and was urging he
 
 ___________________________
 
r on, when all at once she fell
down. "run, heathcliff, run!" she whispered. "they have let the bull-dog
loose, and he holds me!" the devil had seized her ankle, nelly: i heard
his abominable snorting. she did not yell out--no! she would have
scorned to do it, if she had been spitted on the horns of a mad cow. i
did, though: i vociferated curses enough to annihilate any fiend in
christendom; and i got a stone and thrust it between his jaws, and tried
with all my might to cram it down his throat. a beast of a servant came
up with a lantern, at last,
 
 ___________________________
 
 as merry as she could be, dividing her food between the little
dog and skulker, whose nose she pinched as he ate; and kindling a spark
of spirit in the vacant blue eyes of the lintons--a dim reflection from
her own enchanting face.  i saw they were full of stupid admiration; she
is so immeasurably superior to them--to everybody on earth, is she not,
nelly?'

'there will more come of this business than you reckon on,' i answered,
covering him up and extinguishing the light.  'you are incurable,
heathcliff; and mr. hindley will have to proceed to extremities, see if
he won't.'  my words came truer than i desired.  the luckless adventure
made earnshaw furious.  and then mr. linton, to mend matters, paid us a
visit himself on the morrow, and read the young master such a lecture on
the road he guided his family, that he was stirred to look about him, in
earnest.  heathcliff received no flogging, but he was told that the first
word he spoke to miss catherine should ensure a dismissal; and mrs.
earnsh
 
 ___________________________
 
 her things--stay, dear, you
will disarrange your curls--let me untie your hat.'

i removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath a grand plaid silk
frock, white trousers, and burnished shoes; and, while her eyes sparkled
joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to welcome her, she dared hardly
touch them lest they should fawn upon her splendid garments.  she kissed
me gently: i was all flour making the christmas cake, and it would not
have done to give me a hug; and then she looked round for heathcliff.  mr.
and mrs. earnshaw watched anxiously their meeting; thinking it would
enable them to judge, in some measure, what grounds they had for hoping
to succeed in separating the two friends.

heathcliff was hard to discover, at first.  if he were careless, and
uncared for, before catherine's absence, he had been ten times more so
since.  nobody but i even did him the kindness to call him a dirty boy,
and bid him wash himself, once a week; and children of his age seldom
have a natural pleasure in 
 
 ___________________________
 
soap and water.  therefore, not to mention his
clothes, which had seen three months' service in mire and dust, and his
thick uncombed hair, the surface of his face and hands was dismally
beclouded.  he might well skulk behind the settle, on beholding such a
bright, graceful damsel enter the house, instead of a rough-headed
counterpart of himself, as he expected.  'is heathcliff not here?' she
demanded, pulling off her gloves, and displaying fingers wonderfully
whitened with doing nothing and staying indoors.

'heathcliff, you may come forward,' cried mr. hindley, enjoying his
discomfiture, and gratified to see what a forbidding young blackguard he
would be compelled to present himself.  'you may come and wish miss
catherine welcome, like the other servants.'

cathy, catching a glimpse of her friend in his concealment, flew to
embrace him; she bestowed seven or eight k
 
 ___________________________
 
isses on his cheek within the
second, and then stopped, and drawing back, burst into a laugh,
exclaiming, 'why, how very black and cross you look! and how--how funny
and grim!  but that's because i'm used to edgar and isabella linton.
well, heathcliff, have you forgotten me?'

she had some reason to put the question, for shame and pride threw double
gloom over his countenance, and kept him immovable.

'shake hands, heathcliff,' said mr. earnshaw, condescendingly; 'once in a
way that is permitted.'

'i shall not,' replied the boy, finding his tongue at last; 'i shall not
stand to be laughed at.  i shall not bear it!'  and he would have broken
from the circle, but miss cathy seized him again.

'i did not mean to laugh at you,' she said; 'i could not hinder myself:
heathcliff, shake hands at least!  what are you sulky for?  it was only
that you looked odd.  if you wash your face and brush your hair, it will
be all righ
 
 ___________________________
 
admired the shining kitchen utensils, the
polished clock, decked in holly, the silver mugs ranged on a tray ready
to be filled with mulled ale for supper; and above all, the speckless
purity of my particular care--the scoured and well-swept floor.  i gave
due inward applause to every object, and then i remembered how old
earnshaw used to come in when all was tidied, and call me a cant lass,
and slip a shilling into my hand as a christmas-box; and from that i went
on to think of his fondness for heathcliff, and his dread lest he should
suffer neglect after death had removed him: and that naturally led me to
consider the poor lad's situation now, and from singing i changed my mind
to crying.  it struck me soon, however, there would be more sense in
endeavouring to repair some of his wrongs than shedding tears over them:
i got up and walked into the court to seek him.  he was not far; i found
him smoothing the glossy coat of the new pony in the stable, and feeding
the other beasts, according to cus
 
 ___________________________
 
tom.

'make haste, heathcliff!' i said, 'the kitchen is so comfortable; and
joseph is up-stairs: make haste, and let me dress you smart before miss
cathy comes out, and then you can sit together, with the whole hearth to
yourselves, and have a long chatter till bedtime.'

he proceeded with his task, and never turned his head towards me.

'come--are you coming?' i continued.  'there's a little cake for each of
you, nearly enough; and you'll need half-an-hour's donning.'

i waited five minutes, but getting no answer left him.
 
 ___________________________
 
en
once to speak to her old one; but he was gone, and she only stayed to ask
what was the matter with him, and then went back.  in the morning he rose
early; and, as it was a holiday, carried his ill-humour on to the moors;
not re-appearing till the family were departed for church.  fasting and
reflection seemed to have brought him to a better spirit.  he hung about
me for a while, and having screwed up his courage, exclaimed
abruptly--'nelly, make me decent, i'm going to be good.'

'high time, heathcliff,' i said; 'you _have_ grieved catherine: she's
sorry she ever came home, i daresay!  it looks as if you envied her,
because she is more thought of than you.'

the notion of _envying_ catherine was incomprehensible to him, but the
notion of grieving her he understood clearly enough.

'did she say she was grieved?' he inquired, looking very serious.

'she cried when i told her you were off again this morning.'

'well, _i_ cried last night,' he returned, 'and i had more reason to cry
than she.'

'
 
 ___________________________
 
 in.  you must go up and offer to kiss her, and say--you know best
what to say; only do it heartily, and not as if you thought her converted
into a stranger by her grand dress.  and now, though i have dinner to get
ready, i'll steal time to arrange you so that edgar linton shall look
quite a doll beside you: and that he does.  you are younger, and yet,
i'll be bound, you are taller and twice as broad across the shoulders;
you could knock him down in a twinkling; don't you feel that you could?'

heathcliff's face brightened a moment; then it was overcast afresh, and
he sighed.

'but, nelly, if i knocked him down twenty times, that wouldn't make him
less handsome or me more so.  i wish i had light hair and a fair skin,
and was dressed and behaved as well, and had a chance of being as rich as
he will be!'

'and cried for mamma at every turn,' i added, 'and trembled if a country
lad heaved his fist against you, and sat at home all day for a shower of
rain.  oh, heathcliff, you are showing a poor spi
 
 ___________________________
 
u, i do.  you're fit for a prince in disguise.  who knows but
your father was emperor of china, and your mother an indian queen, each
of them able to buy up, with one week's income, wuthering heights and
thrushcross grange together?  and you were kidnapped by wicked sailors
and brought to england.  were i in your place, i would frame high notions
of my birth; and the thoughts of what i was should give me courage and
dignity to support the oppressions of a little farmer!'

so i chattered on; and heathcliff gradually lost his frown and began to
look quite pleasant, when all at once our conversation was interrupted by
a rumbling sound moving up the road and entering the court.  he ran to
the window and i to the door, just in time to behold the two lintons
descend from the family carriage, smothered in cloaks and furs, and the
earnshaws dismount from their horses: they often rode to church in
winter.  catherine took a hand of each of the children, and brought them
into the house and set them before 
 
 ___________________________
 
ainties as well as we.'

'he shall have his share of my hand, if i catch him downstairs till
dark,' cried hindley.  'begone, you vagabond!  what! you are attempting
the coxcomb, are you?  wait till i get hold of those elegant locks--see
if i won't pull them a bit longer!'

'they are long enough already,' observed master linton, peeping from the
doorway; 'i wonder they don't make his head ache.  it's like a colt's
mane over his eyes!'

he ventured this remark without any intention to insult; but heathcliff's
violent nature was not prepared to endure the appearance of impertinence
from one whom he seemed to hate, even then, as a rival.  he seized a
tureen of hot apple sauce (the first thing that came under his grip) and
dashed it full against the speaker's face and neck; who instantly
commenced a lament that brought isabella and catherine hurrying to the
place.  mr. earnshaw snatched up the culprit directly and conveyed him to
his chamber; where, doubtless, he administered a rough remedy to cool t
 
 ___________________________
 
 to myself; 'how lightly she dismisses her old
playmate's troubles.  i could not have imagined her to be so selfish.'
she lifted a mouthful to her lips: then she set it down again: her cheeks
flushed, and the tears gushed over them.  she slipped her fork to the
floor, and hastily dived under the cloth to conceal her emotion.  i did
not call her unfeeling long; for i perceived she was in purgatory
throughout the day, and wearying to find an opportunity of getting by
herself, or paying a visit to heathcliff, who had been locked up by the
master: as i discovered, on endeavouring to introduce to him a private
mess of victuals.

in the evening we had a dance.  cathy begged that he might be liberated
then, as isabella linton had no partner: her entreaties were vain, and i
was appointed to supply the deficiency.  we got rid of all gloom in the
excitement of the exercise, and our pleasure was increased by the arrival
of the gimmerton band, mustering fifteen strong: a trumpet, a trombone,
clarionets, bas
 
 ___________________________
 
ontributions every christmas, and we esteemed it a first-rate treat to
hear them.  after the usual carols had been sung, we set them to songs
and glees.  mrs. earnshaw loved the music, and so they gave us plenty.

catherine loved it too: but she said it sounded sweetest at the top of
the steps, and she went up in the dark: i followed. they shut the house
door below, never noting our absence, it was so full of people. she made
no stay at the stairs'-head, but mounted farther, to the garret where
heathcliff was confined, and called him. he stubbornly declined
answering for a while: she persevered, and finally persuaded him to hold
communion with her through the boards. i let the poor things converse
unmolested, till i supposed the songs were going to cease, and the
singers to get some refreshment: then i clambered up the ladder to warn
her. instead of finding her outside, i heard her voice within. the
little monkey had crept by the skylight of one garret, along the roof,
into the skylight of the o
 
 ___________________________
 
ther, and it was with the utmost difficulty i
could coax her out again. when she did come, heathcliff came with her,
and she insisted that i should take him into the kitchen, as my
fellow-servant had gone to a neighbour's, to be removed from the sound
of our 'devil's psalmody,' as it pleased him to call it. i told them i
intended by no means to encourage their tricks: but as the prisoner had
never broken his fast since yesterday's dinner, i would wink at his
cheating mr. hindley that once. he went down: i set him a stool by the
fire, and offered him a quantity of good things: but he was sick an
 
 ___________________________
 
d
could eat little, and my attempts to entertain him were thrown away. he
leant his two elbows on his knees, and his chin on his hands and
remained rapt in dumb meditation. on my inquiring the subject of his
thoughts, he answered gravely--'i'm trying to settle how i shall pay
hindley back. i don't care how long i wait, if i can only do it at last.
i hope he will not die before i do!'

'for shame, heathcliff!' said i.  'it is for god to punish wicked people;
we should learn to forgive.'

'no, god won't have the satisfaction that i shall,' he returned.  'i only
wish i knew the best way!  let me alone, and i'll plan it out: while i'm
thinking of that i don't feel pain.'

'but, mr. lockwood, i forget these tales cannot divert you.  i'm annoyed
how i should dream of chattering on at such a rate; and your gruel cold,
and you nodding for bed!  i could have told heathcliff's history, all
that you need hea
 
 ___________________________
 
tion.  the servants could not bear his tyrannical and
evil conduct long: joseph and i were the only two that would stay.  i had
not the heart to leave my charge; and besides, you know, i had been his
foster-sister, and excused his behaviour more readily than a stranger
would.  joseph remained to hector over tenants and labourers; and because
it was his vocation to be where he had plenty of wickedness to reprove.

the master's bad ways and bad companions formed a pretty example for
catherine and heathcliff.  his treatment of the latter was enough to make
a fiend of a saint.  and, truly, it appeared as if the lad _were_
possessed of something diabolical at that period.  he delighted to
witness hindley degrading himself past redemption; and became daily more
notable for savage sullenness and ferocity.  i could not half tell what
an infernal house we had.  the curate dropped calling, and nobody decent
came near us, at last; unless edgar linton's visits to miss cathy might
be an exception.  at fiftee
 
 ___________________________
 
n she was the queen of the country-side; she
had no peer; and she did turn out a haughty, headstrong creature!  i own
i did not like her, after infancy was past; and i vexed her frequently by
trying to bring down her arrogance: she never took an aversion to me,
though.  she had a wondrous constancy to old attachments: even heathcliff
kept his hold on her affections unalterably; and young linton, with all
his superiority, found it difficult to make an equally deep impression.
he was my late master: that is his portrait over the fireplace.  it used
to hang on one side, and his wife's on the other; but hers has been
removed, or else you might see something of what she was.  can you make
that out?

mrs. dean raised the candle, and i discerned a soft-featured face,
exceedingly resembling the young lady at the heights, but more p
 
 ___________________________
 
 no temptation to show
her rough side in their company, and had the sense to be ashamed of
being rude where she experienced such invariable courtesy, she imposed
unwittingly on the old lady and gentleman by her ingenious cordiality;
gained the admiration of isabella, and the heart and soul of her
brother: acquisitions that flattered her from the first--for she was
full of ambition--and led her to adopt a double character without
exactly intending to deceive any one. in the place where she heard
heathcliff termed a 'vulgar young ruffian,' and 'worse than a brute,'
she took care not to act like him; but at home she had small inclination
to practise politeness that would only be laughed at, and restrain an
unruly nature when it would bring her neither credit nor praise.

mr. edgar seldom mustered courage to visit wuthering heights openly.  he
had a terror of earnshaw's reputation, and shrunk from encountering him;
and yet he was always received with our best attempts at civility: the
master himself
 
 ___________________________
 
 avoided offending him, knowing why he came; and if he
could not be gracious, kept out of the way.  i rather think his
appearance there was distasteful to catherine; she was not artful, never
played the coquette, and had evidently an objection to her two friends
meeting at all; for when heathcliff expressed contempt of linton in his
presence, she could not half coincide, as she did in his absence; and
when linton evinced disgust and antipathy to heathcliff, she dared not
treat his sentiments with indifference, as if depreciation of her
playmate were of scarcely any consequence to her.  i've had many a laugh
at her perplexities and untold troubles, which she vainly strove to hide
from my mockery.  that sounds ill-natured: but she was so proud it became
really impossible to pity her distresses, till she should be chastened
into more humility.  she did bring herself, finally, to confess, and to
confide in me: there was not a soul else that she might
 
 ___________________________
 
 fashion into an
adviser.

mr. hindley had gone from home one afternoon, and heathcliff presumed to
give himself a holiday on the strength of it.  he had reached the age of
sixteen then, i think, and without having bad features, or being
deficient in intellect, he contrived to convey an impression of inward
and outward repulsiveness that his present aspect retains no traces of.
in the first place, he had by that time lost the benefit of his early
education: continual hard work, begun soon and concluded late, had
extinguished any curiosity he once possessed in pursuit of knowledge,
 
 ___________________________
 
uld be no gratification in lavishing such marks of
affection on him.  on the before-named occasion he came into the house to
announce his intention of doing nothing, while i was assisting miss cathy
to arrange her dress: she had not reckoned on his taking it into his head
to be idle; and imagining she would have the whole place to herself, she
managed, by some means, to inform mr. edgar of her brother's absence, and
was then preparing to receive him.

'cathy, are you busy this afternoon?' asked heathcliff.  'are you going
anywhere?'

'no, it is raining,' she answered.

'why have you that silk frock on, then?' he said.  'nobody coming here, i
hope?'

'not that i know of,' stammered miss: 'but you should be in the field
now, heathcliff.  it is an hour past dinnertime: i thought you were
gone.'

'hindley does not often free us from his accursed presence,' observed the
boy.  'i'll not work any more to-day: i'll stay with you.'

'oh, but joseph will tell,' she suggested; 'you'd better go!'

'joseph i
 
 ___________________________
 
k of being scolded for no good.'

'order ellen to say you are engaged, cathy,' he persisted; 'don't turn me
out for those pitiful, silly friends of yours!  i'm on the point,
sometimes, of complaining that they--but i'll not--'

'that they what?' cried catherine, gazing at him with a troubled
countenance.  'oh, nelly!' she added petulantly, jerking her head away
from my hands, 'you've combed my hair quite out of curl!  that's enough;
let me alone.  what are you on the point of complaining about,
heathcliff?'

'nothing--only look at the almanack on that wall;' he pointed to a framed
sheet hanging near the window, and continued, 'the crosses are for the
evenings you have spent with the lintons, the dots for those spent with
me.  do you see?  i've marked every day.'

'yes--very foolish: as if i took notice!' replied catherine, in a peevish
tone.  'and where is the sense of that?'

'to show that i _do_ take notice,' said heathcliff.

'and should i always be sitting with you?' she demanded, growing mo
 
 ___________________________
 
re
irritated.  'what good do i get?  what do you talk about?  you might be
dumb, or a baby, for anything you say to amuse me, or for anything you
do, either!'

'you never told me before that i talked too little, or that you disliked
my company, cathy!' exclaimed heathcliff, in much agitation.

'it's no company at all, when people know nothing and say nothing,' she
muttered.

her companion rose up, but he hadn't time to express his feelings
further, for a horse's feet were heard on the flags, and having knocked
gently, young linton entered, his face brilliant with delight at the
unexpected summon she had received.  doubtless catherine marked the
difference between her friends, as one came in and the other went out.
the contrast resembled what you see in exchanging
 
 ___________________________
 
self and your
dusters off; when company are in the house, servants don't commence
scouring and cleaning in the room where they are!'

'it's a good opportunity, now that master is away,' i answered aloud: 'he
hates me to be fidgeting over these things in his presence.  i'm sure mr.
edgar will excuse me.'

'i hate you to be fidgeting in _my_ presence,' exclaimed the young lady
imperiously, not allowing her guest time to speak: she had failed to
recover her equanimity since the little dispute with heathcliff.

'i'm sorry for it, miss catherine,' was my response; and i proceeded
assiduously with my occupation.

she, supposing edgar could not see her, snatched the cloth from my hand,
and pinched me, with a prolonged wrench, very spitefully on the arm.  i've
said i did not love her, and rather relished mortifying her vanity now
and then: besides, she hurt me extremely; so i started up from my knees,
and screamed out, 'oh, miss, that's a nasty trick!  you have no right to
nip me, and i'm not going to b
 
 ___________________________
 
oor hareton was squalling and kicking in his father's arms with all his
might, and redoubled his yells when he carried him up-stairs and lifted
him over the banister.  i cried out that he would frighten the child into
fits, and ran to rescue him.  as i reached them, hindley leant forward on
the rails to listen to a noise below; almost forgetting what he had in
his hands.  'who is that?' he asked, hearing some one approaching the
stairs'-foot.  i leant forward also, for the purpose of signing to
heathcliff, whose step i recognised, not to come further; and, at the
instant when my eye quitted hareton, he gave a sudden spring, delivered
himself from the careless grasp that held him, and fell.

there was scarcely time to experience a thrill of horror before we saw
that the little wretch was safe.  heathcliff arrived underneath just at
the critical moment; by a natural impulse he arrested his descent, and
setting him on his feet, looked up to discover the author of the
accident.  a miser who has part
 
 ___________________________
 
 with
me, sobbed off his terror directly.  at the first finger his father laid
on him, however, he shrieked again louder than before, and struggled as
if he would go into convulsions.

'you shall not meddle with him!' i continued.  'he hates you--they all
hate you--that's the truth!  a happy family you have; and a pretty state
you're come to!'

'i shall come to a prettier, yet, nelly,' laughed the misguided man,
recovering his hardness.  'at present, convey yourself and him away.  and
hark you, heathcliff! clear you too quite from my reach and hearing.  i
wouldn't murder you to-night; unless, perhaps, i set the house on fire:
but that's as my fancy goes.'

while saying this he took a pint bottle of brandy from the dresser, and
poured some into a tumbler.

'nay, don't!' i entreated.  'mr. hindley, do take warning.  have mercy on
this unfortunate boy, if you care nothing for yourself!'

'any one will do better for him than i shall,' he answered.

'have mercy on your own soul!' i said, endeavouring
 
 ___________________________
 
 to snatch the glass
from his hand.

'not i!  on the contrary, i shall have great pleasure in sending it to
perdition to punish its maker,' exclaimed the blasphemer.  'here's to its
hearty damnation!'

he drank the spirits and impatiently bade us go; terminating his command
with a sequel of horrid imprecations too bad to repeat or remember.

'it's a pity he cannot kill himself with drink,' observed heathcliff,
muttering an echo of curses back when the door was shut.  'he's doing his
very utmost; but his constitution defies him.  mr. kenneth says he would
wager his mare that he'll outlive any man on this side gimmerton, and go
to the grave a hoary sinner; unless some happy chance out of the common
course befall him.'

i went into the kitchen, and sat down to lull my little lamb to sleep.
heathcliff, as i thought, walked through to the barn.  it turned out
afterwards that he only got as far as the oth
 
 ___________________________
 

when miss cathy, who had listened to the hubbub from her room, put her
head in, and whispered,--'are you alone, nelly?'

'yes, miss,' i replied.

she entered and approached the hearth.  i, supposing she was going to say
something, looked up.  the expression of her face seemed disturbed and
anxious.  her lips were half asunder, as if she meant to speak, and she
drew a breath; but it escaped in a sigh instead of a sentence.  i resumed
my song; not having forgotten her recent behaviour.

'where's heathcliff?' she said, interrupting me.

'about his work in the stable,' was my answer.

he did not contradict me; perhaps he had fallen into a doze.  there
followed another long pause, during which i perceived a drop or two
trickle from catherine's cheek to the flags.  is she sorry for her
shameful conduct?--i asked myself.  that will be a novelty: but she may
come to the point--as she will--i sha'n't help her!  no, she felt small
trouble regarding any subject, save her own concerns.

'oh, dear!' she cri
 
 ___________________________
 
tion to leave my chair.

'this is nothing,' cried she: 'i was only going to say that heaven did
not seem to be my home; and i broke my heart with weeping to come back to
earth; and the angels were so angry that they flung me out into the
middle of the heath on the top of wuthering heights; where i woke sobbing
for joy.  that will do to explain my secret, as well as the other.  i've
no more business to marry edgar linton than i have to be in heaven; and
if the wicked man in there had not brought heathcliff so low, i shouldn't
have thought of it.  it would degrade me to marry heathcliff now; so he
shall never know how i love him: and that, not because he's handsome,
nelly, but because he's more myself than i am.  whatever our souls are
made of, his and mine are the same; and linton's is as different as a
moonbeam from lightning, or frost from fire.'

ere this speech ended i became sensible of heathcliff's presence.  having
noticed a slight movement, i turned my head, and saw him rise from the
benc
 
 ___________________________
 
h, and steal out noiselessly.  he had listened till he heard
catherine say it would degrade her to marry him, and then he stayed to
hear no further.  my companion, sitting on the ground, was prevented by
the back of the settle from remarking his presence or departure; but i
started, and bade her hush!

'why?' she asked, gazing nervously round.

'joseph is here,' i answered, catching opportunely the roll of his
cartwheels up the road; 'and heathcliff will come in with him.  i'm not
sure whether he were not at the door this moment.'

'oh, he couldn't overhear me at the door!' said she.  'give me hareton,
while you get the supper, and when it is ready ask me to sup with you.  i
want to cheat my uncomfortable conscience, and be convinced that
heathcliff has no notion of these things.  he has not, has he?  he does
not know what being in love is!'

'i see no reason that he should not know, as well as you,' i returned;
'and if you are his choice,
 
 ___________________________
 
soon as you become mrs. linton, he loses friend, and
love, and all!  have you considered how you'll bear the separation, and
how he'll bear to be quite deserted in the world?  because, miss
catherine--'

'he quite deserted! we separated!' she exclaimed, with an accent of
indignation.  'who is to separate us, pray?  they'll meet the fate of
milo!  not as long as i live, ellen: for no mortal creature.  every
linton on the face of the earth might melt into nothing before i could
consent to forsake heathcliff.  oh, that's not what i intend--that's not
what i mean!  i shouldn't be mrs. linton were such a price demanded!
he'll be as much to me as he has been all his lifetime.  edgar must shake
off his antipathy, and tolerate him, at least.  he will, when he learns
my true feelings towards him.  nelly, i see now you think me a selfish
wretch; but did it never strike you that if heathcliff and i married, we
should be beggars? whereas, if i marry linton i can aid heathcliff to
rise, and place him out of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 being the wife of
young linton.'

'it is not,' retorted she; 'it is the best!  the others were the
satisfaction of my whims: and for edgar's sake, too, to satisfy him.  this
is for the sake of one who comprehends in his person my feelings to edgar
and myself.  i cannot express it; but surely you and everybody have a
notion that there is or should be an existence of yours beyond you.  what
were the use of my creation, if i were entirely contained here?  my great
miseries in this world have been heathcliff's miseries, and i watched and
felt each from the beginning: my great thought in living is himself.  if
all else perished, and _he_ remained, _i_ should still continue to be;
and if all else remained, and he were annihilated, the universe would
turn to a mighty stranger: i should not seem a part of it.--my love for
linton is like the foliage in the woods: time will change it, i'm well
aware, as winter changes the trees.  my love for heathcliff resembles the
eternal rocks beneath: a source of lit
 
 ___________________________
 
tle visible delight, but necessary.
nelly, i _am_ heathcliff!  he's always, always in my mind: not as a
pleasure, any more than i am always a pleasure to myself, but as my own
being.  so don't talk of our separation again: it is impracticable; and--'

she paused, and hid her face in the folds of my gown; but i jerked it
forcibly away.  i was out of patience with her folly!

'if i can make any sense of your nonsense, miss,' i said, 'it only goes
to convince me that you are ignorant of the duties you undertake in
marrying; or else that you are a wicked, un
 
 ___________________________
 
and nursed
hareton, while i made the supper.  after it was cooked, my fellow-servant
and i began to quarrel who should carry some to mr. hindley; and we
didn't settle it till all was nearly cold.  then we came to the agreement
that we would let him ask, if he wanted any; for we feared particularly
to go into his presence when he had been some time alone.

'and how isn't that nowt comed in fro' th' field, be this time?  what is
he about? girt idle seeght!' demanded the old man, looking round for
heathcliff.

'i'll call him,' i replied.  'he's in the barn, i've no doubt.'

i went and called, but got no answer.  on returning, i whispered to
catherine that he had heard a good part of what she said, i was sure; and
told how i saw him quit the kitchen just as she complained of her
brother's conduct regarding him.  she jumped up in a fine fright, flung
hareton on to the settle, and ran to seek for her friend herself; not
taking leisure to consider why she was so flurried, or how her talk would
have aff
 
 ___________________________
 
while that joseph proposed we
should wait no longer.  he cunningly conjectured they were staying away
in order to avoid hearing his protracted blessing.  they were 'ill eneugh
for ony fahl manners,' he affirmed.  and on their behalf he added that
night a special prayer to the usual quarter-of-an-hour's supplication
before meat, and would have tacked another to the end of the grace, had
not his young mistress broken in upon him with a hurried command that he
must run down the road, and, wherever heathcliff had rambled, find and
make him re-enter directly!

'i want to speak to him, and i _must_, before i go upstairs,' she said.
'and the gate is open: he is somewhere out of hearing; for he would not
reply, though i shouted at the top of the fold as loud as i could.'

joseph objected at first; she was too much in earnest, however, to suffer
contradiction; and at last he placed his hat on his head, and walked
grumbling forth.  meantime, catherine paced up and down the floor,
exclaiming--'i wonder whe
 
 ___________________________
 
re he is--i wonder where he can be!  what did i
say, nelly?  i've forgotten.  was he vexed at my bad humour this
afternoon?  dear! tell me what i've said to grieve him?  i do wish he'd
come.  i do wish he would!'

'what a noise for nothing!' i cried, though rather uneasy myself.  'what
a trifle scares you!  it's surely no great cause of alarm that heathcliff
should take a moonlight saunter on the moors, or even lie too sulky to
speak to us in the hay-loft.  i'll engage he's lurking there.  see if i
don't ferret him out!'

i departed to renew my search; its result was disappointment, and
joseph's quest ended in the same.

'yon lad gets war und war!' observed he on re-entering.  'he's left th'
gate at t' full swing, and miss's pony has trodden dahn two rigs o' corn,
and plottered through, raight o'er into t' meadow!  hahsomdiver, t'
maister 'ull play
 
 ___________________________
 
 t' devil to-morn, and he'll do weel.  he's patience
itsseln wi' sich careless, offald craters--patience itsseln he is!  bud
he'll not be soa allus--yah's see, all on ye!  yah mun'n't drive him out
of his heead for nowt!'

'have you found heathcliff, you ass?' interrupted catherine.  'have you
been looking for him, as i ordered?'

'i sud more likker look for th' horse,' he replied.  'it 'ud be to more
sense.  bud i can look for norther horse nur man of a neeght loike
this--as black as t' chimbley! und heathcliff's noan t' chap to coom at
_my_ whistle--happen he'll be less hard o' hearing wi' _ye_!'

it _was_ a very dark evening for summer: the clouds appeared inclined to
thunder, and i said we had better all sit down; the approaching rain

 
 ___________________________
 
 so damp and pale, child?'

'i've been wet,' she answered reluctantly, 'and i'm cold, that's all.'

'oh, she is naughty!' i cried, perceiving the master to be tolerably
sober.  'she got steeped in the shower of yesterday evening, and there
she has sat the night through, and i couldn't prevail on her to stir.'

mr. earnshaw stared at us in surprise.  'the night through,' he repeated.
'what kept her up? not fear of the thunder, surely?  that was over hours
since.'

neither of us wished to mention heathcliff's absence, as long as we could
conceal it; so i replied, i didn't know how she took it into her head to
sit up; and she said nothing.  the morning was fresh and cool; i threw
back the lattice, and presently the room filled with sweet scents from
the garden; but catherine called peevishly to me, 'ellen, shut the
window.  i'm starving!'  and her teeth chattered as she shrank closer to
the almost extinguished embers.

'she's ill,' said hindley, taking her wrist; 'i suppose that's the reason
she wo
 
 ___________________________
 
on to thrust in his evil tongue.  'if i war
yah, maister, i'd just slam t' boards i' their faces all on 'em, gentle
and simple!  never a day ut yah're off, but yon cat o' linton comes
sneaking hither; and miss nelly, shoo's a fine lass! shoo sits watching
for ye i' t' kitchen; and as yah're in at one door, he's out at t'other;
and, then, wer grand lady goes a-courting of her side!  it's bonny
behaviour, lurking amang t' fields, after twelve o' t' night, wi' that
fahl, flaysome divil of a gipsy, heathcliff!  they think _i'm_ blind; but
i'm noan: nowt ut t' soart!--i seed young linton boath coming and going,
and i seed _yah_' (directing his discourse to me), 'yah gooid fur nowt,
slattenly witch! nip up and bolt into th' house, t' minute yah heard t'
maister's horse-fit clatter up t' road.'

'silence, eavesdropper!' cried catherine; 'none of your insolence before
me!  edgar linton came yesterday by chance, hindley; and it was _i_ who
told him to be off: because i knew you would not like to have met
 
 ___________________________
 
 him as
you were.'

'you lie, cathy, no doubt,' answered her brother, 'and you are a
confounded simpleton!  but never mind linton at present: tell me, were
you not with heathcliff last night?  speak the truth, now.  you need not
be afraid of harming him: though i hate him as much as ever, he did me a
good turn a short time since that will make my conscience tender of
breaking his neck.  to prevent it, i shall send him about his business
this very morning; and after he's gone, i'd advise you all to look sharp:
i shall only have the more humour for you.'

'i never saw heathcliff last night,' answered catherine, beginning to sob
bitterly: 'and if you do turn him out of door
 
 ___________________________
 
, she weathered it through.  old mrs. linton paid us
several visits, to be sure, and set things to rights, and scolded and
ordered us all; and when catherine was convalescent, she insisted on
conveying her to thrushcross grange: for which deliverance we were very
grateful.  but the poor dame had reason to repent of her kindness: she
and her husband both took the fever, and died within a few days of each
other.

our young lady returned to us saucier and more passionate, and haughtier
than ever.  heathcliff had never been heard of since the evening of the
thunder-storm; and, one day, i had the misfortune, when she had provoked
me exceedingly, to lay the blame of his disappearance on her: where
indeed it belonged, as she well knew.  from that period, for several
months, she ceased to hold any communication with me, save in the
relation of a mere servant.  joseph fell under a ban also: he would speak
his mind, and lecture her all the same as if she were a little girl; and
she esteemed herself a woma
 
 ___________________________
 
 and i
have meditated for another hour or two, i shall summon courage to go
also, in spite of aching laziness of head and limbs.




chapter x


a charming introduction to a hermit's life!  four weeks' torture,
tossing, and sickness!  oh, these bleak winds and bitter northern skies,
and impassable roads, and dilatory country surgeons!  and oh, this dearth
of the human physiognomy! and, worse than all, the terrible intimation of
kenneth that i need not expect to be out of doors till spring!

mr. heathcliff has just honoured me with a call.  about seven days ago he
sent me a brace of grouse--the last of the season.  scoundrel!  he is not
altogether guiltless in this illness of mine; and that i had a great mind
to tell him.  but, alas! how could i offend a man who was charitable
enough to sit at my bedside a good hour, and talk on some other subject
than pills and draughts, blisters and leeches?  this is quite an easy
interval.  i am too weak to read; yet i feel as if i could enjoy
something intere
 
 ___________________________
 
he heroine was married.  i'll ring: she'll be delighted to find me
capable of talking cheerfully.  mrs. dean came.

'it wants twenty minutes, sir, to taking the medicine,' she commenced.

'away, away with it!' i replied; 'i desire to have--'

'the doctor says you must drop the powders.'

'with all my heart!  don't interrupt me.  come and take your seat here.
keep your fingers from that bitter phalanx of vials.  draw your knitting
out of your pocket--that will do--now continue the history of mr.
heathcliff, from where you left off, to the present day.  did he finish
his education on the continent, and come back a gentleman? or did he get
a sizar's place at college, or escape to america, and earn honours by
drawing blood from his foster-country? or make a fortune more promptly on
the english highways?'

'he may have done a little in all these vocations, mr. lockwood; but i
couldn't give my word for any.  i stated before that i didn't know how he
gained his money; neither am i aware of the means he
 
 ___________________________
 
med, while i continued staring; 'and
the whole of that time all round has been as still as death.  i dared not
enter.  you do not know me?  look, i'm not a stranger!'

a ray fell on his features; the cheeks were sallow, and half covered with
black whiskers; the brows lowering, the eyes deep-set and singular.  i
remembered the eyes.

'what!' i cried, uncertain whether to regard him as a worldly visitor,
and i raised my hands in amazement.  'what! you come back?  is it really
you?  is it?'

'yes, heathcliff,' he replied, glancing from me up to the windows, which
reflected a score of glittering moons, but showed no lights from within.
'are they at home? where is she?  nelly, you are not glad! you needn't be
so disturbed.  is she here?  speak!  i want to have one word with
her--your mistress.  go, and say some person from gimmerton desires to
see her.'

'how will she take it?' i exclaimed.  'what will she do?  the surprise
bewilders me--it will put her out of her head!  and you _are_ heathcliff!
but
 
 ___________________________
 
ually going away leaving it unsaid, after having put my question about
the candles, when a sense of my folly compelled me to return, and mutter,
'a person from gimmerton wishes to see you ma'am.'

'what does he want?' asked mrs. linton.

'i did not question him,' i answered.

'well, close the curtains, nelly,' she said; 'and bring up tea.  i'll be
back again directly.'

she quitted the apartment; mr. edgar inquired, carelessly, who it was.

'some one mistress does not expect,' i replied.  'that heathcliff--you
recollect him, sir--who used to live at mr. earnshaw's.'

'what! the gipsy--the ploughboy?' he cried.  'why did you not say so to
catherine?'

'hush! you must not call him by those names, master,' i said.  'she'd be
sadly grieved to hear you.  she was nearly heartbroken when he ran off.  i
guess his return will make a jubilee to her.'

mr. linton walked to a window on the other side of the room that
overlooked the court.  he unfastened it, and leant out.  i suppose they
were below, for he 
 
 ___________________________
 
exclaimed quickly: 'don't stand there, love!  bring
the person in, if it be anyone particular.'  ere long, i heard the click
of the latch, and catherine flew up-stairs, breathless and wild; too
excited to show gladness: indeed, by her face, you would rather have
surmised an awful calamity.

'oh, edgar, edgar!' she panted, flinging her arms round his neck.  'oh,
edgar darling!  heathcliff's come back--he is!'  and she tightened her
embrace to a squeeze.

'well, well,' cried her husband, crossly, 'don't strangle me for that!  he
never struck me as such a marvellous treasure.  there is no need to be
frantic!'

'i know you didn't like him,' she answered, repressing a little the
intensity of her delight.  'yet, for my sake, you must be friends now.
shall i tell him to come up?'

'here,' he said, 'into the parlour?'

'where else?' she asked.

he looked vexed, and suggested the kitche
 
 ___________________________
 
n as a more suitable place for
him.  mrs. linton eyed him with a droll expression--half angry, half
laughing at his fastidiousness.

'no,' she added, after a while; 'i cannot sit in the kitchen.  set two
tables here, ellen: one for your master and miss isabella, being gentry;
the other for heathcliff and myself, being of the lower orders.  will
that please you, dear?  or must i have a fire lighted elsewhere?  if so,
give directions.  i'll run down and secure my guest.  i'm afraid the joy
is too great to be real!'

she was about to dart off again; but edgar arrested her.

'_you_ bid him step up,' he said, addressing me; 'and, catherine, try to
be glad, without being absurd.  the whole household need not witness the
sight of your welcoming a runaway servant as a brother.'

i descended, and fo
 
 ___________________________
 
und heathcliff waiting under the porch, evidently
anticipating an invitation to enter.  he followed my guidance without
waste of words, and i ushered him into the presence of the master and
mistress, whose flushed cheeks betrayed signs of warm talking.  but the
lady's glowed with another feeling when her friend appeared at the door:
she sprang forward, took both his hands, and led him to linton; and then
she seized linton's reluctant fingers and crushed them into his.  now,
fully revealed by the fire and cand
 
 ___________________________
 
lelight, i was amazed, more than ever,
to behold the transformation of heathcliff.  he had grown a tall,
athletic, well-formed man; beside whom my master seemed quite slender and
youth-like.  his upright carriage suggested the idea of his having been
in the army.  his countenance was much older in expression and decision
of feature than mr. linton's; it looked intelligent, and retained no
marks of former degradation.  a half-civilised ferocity lurked yet in the
depressed brows and eyes full of black fire, but it was subdued; and his
manner was even dignified: quite divested 
 
 ___________________________
 
of roughness, though stern for
grace.  my master's surprise equalled or exceeded mine: he remained for a
minute at a loss how to address the ploughboy, as he had called him.
heathcliff dropped his slight hand, and stood looking at him coolly till
he chose to speak.

'sit down, sir,' he said, at length.  'mrs. linton, recalling old times,
would have me give you a cordial reception; and, of course, i am
gratified when anything occurs to please her.'

'and i also,' answered heathcliff, 'especially if it be anything in which
i have a part.  i shall stay an hour or two willingly.'

he took a seat opposite catherine, who kept her gaze fixed on him as if
she feared he would vanish were she to remove it.  he did not raise his
to her often: a quick glance now and then sufficed; but it flashed back,
each time more confidently, the undisguised delight he drank from hers.
they were too much absorbed in their mutual joy to suffer embarrassment.
not so mr. edgar: he grew pale with pure
 
 ___________________________
 
 annoyance: a feeling that
reached its climax when his lady rose, and stepping across the rug,
seized heathcliff's hands again, and laughed like one beside herself.

'i shall think it a dream to-morrow!' she cried.  'i shall not be able to
believe that i have seen, and touched, and spoken to you once more.  and
yet, cruel heathcliff! you don't deserve this welcome.  to be absent and
silent for three years, and never to think of me!'

'a little more than you have thought of me,' he murmured.  'i heard of
your marriage, cathy, not long since; and, while waiting in the yard
below, i meditated this plan--just to have one glimpse of your face, a
stare of surprise, perhaps, and pretended pleasure; afterwards settle my
score with hindley; and then prevent the law by doing execution on
myself.  your welcome has put these ideas out
 
 ___________________________
 
 of my mind; but beware of
meeting me with another aspect next time!  nay, you'll not drive me off
again.  you were really sorry for me, were you?  well, there was cause.
i've fought through a bitter life since i last heard your voice; and you
must forgive me, for i struggled only for you!'

'catherine, unless we are to have cold tea, please to come to the table,'
interrupted linton, striving to preserve his ordinary tone, and a due
measure of politeness.  'mr. heathcliff will have a long walk, wherever
he may lodge to-night; and i'm thirsty.'

she took her post before the urn; and miss isabella came, summoned by the
bell; then, having handed their chairs forward, i left the room.  the
meal hardly endured ten minutes.  catherine's cup was never filled: she
could neither eat nor drink.  edgar had made a slop in his saucer, and
scarcely swallowed a mouthful.  their guest did not protract his stay
that evening above an hour longer.  i asked, as he departed, if he w
 
 ___________________________
 
ide, and pulling
me by the hair to rouse me.

'i cannot rest, ellen,' she said, by way of apology.  'and i want some
living creature to keep me company in my happiness!  edgar is sulky,
because i'm glad of a thing that does not interest him: he refuses to
open his mouth, except to utter pettish, silly speeches; and he affirmed
i was cruel and selfish for wishing to talk when he was so sick and
sleepy.  he always contrives to be sick at the least cross!  i gave a few
sentences of commendation to heathcliff, and he, either for a headache or
a pang of envy, began to cry: so i got up and left him.'

'what use is it praising heathcliff to him?' i answered.  'as lads they
had an aversion to each other, and heathcliff would hate just as much to
hear him praised: it's human nature.  let mr. linton alone about him,
unless you would like an open quarrel between them.'

'but does it not show great weakness?' pursued she.  'i'm not envious: i
never feel hurt at the brightness of isabella's yellow hair and t
 
 ___________________________
 
nce to both sides; and then those you term weak are very capable
of being as obstinate as you.'

'and then we shall fight to the death, sha'n't we, nelly?' she returned,
laughing.  'no! i tell you, i have such faith in linton's love, that i
believe i might kill him, and he wouldn't wish to retaliate.'

i advised her to value him the more for his affection.

'i do,' she answered, 'but he needn't resort to whining for trifles.  it
is childish and, instead of melting into tears because i said that
heathcliff was now worthy of anyone's regard, and it would honour the
first gentleman in the country to be his friend, he ought to have said it
for me, and been delighted from sympathy.  he must get accustomed to him,
and he may as well like him: considering how heathcliff has reason to
object to him, i'm sure he behaved excellently!'

'what do you think of his going to wuthering heights?' i inquired.  'he
is reformed in every respect, apparently: quite a christian: offering the
right hand of fellowship t
 
 ___________________________
 
o his enemies all around!'

'he explained it,' she replied.  'i wonder as much as you.  he said he
called to gather information concerning me from you, supposing you
resided there still; and joseph told hindley, who came out and fell to
questioning him of what he had been doing, and how he had been living;
and finally, desired him to walk in.  there were some persons sitting at
cards; heathcliff joined them; my brother lost some money to him, and,
finding him plentifully supplied, he requested that he would come again
in the evening: to which he consented.  hindley is too reckless to select
his acquaintance prudently: he doesn't trouble himself to reflect on the
causes he might have for mistrusting one whom he has basely injured.  but
heathcliff affirms his principal reason for resuming a connection with
his ancient persecutor is a wish to install himself in quarters at walking
distanc
 
 ___________________________
 
 departed; and the success of her
fulfilled resolution was obvious on the morrow: mr. linton had not only
abjured his peevishness (though his spirits seemed still subdued by
catherine's exuberance of vivacity), but he ventured no objection to her
taking isabella with her to wuthering heights in the afternoon; and she
rewarded him with such a summer of sweetness and affection in return as
made the house a paradise for several days; both master and servants
profiting from the perpetual sunshine.

heathcliff--mr. heathcliff i should say in future--used the liberty of
visiting at thrushcross grange cautiously, at first: he seemed estimating
how far its owner would bear his intrusion.  catherine, also, deemed it
judicious to moderate her expressions of pleasure in receiving him; and
he gradually established his right to be expected.  he retained a great
deal of the reserve for which his boyhood was remarkable; and that served
to repress all startling demonstrations of feeling.  my master's
uneasiness
 
 ___________________________
 
en and irresistible attraction towards the
tolerated guest.  she was at that time a charming young lady of eighteen;
infantile in manners, though possessed of keen wit, keen feelings, and a
keen temper, too, if irritated.  her brother, who loved her tenderly, was
appalled at this fantastic preference.  leaving aside the degradation of
an alliance with a nameless man, and the possible fact that his property,
in default of heirs male, might pass into such a one's power, he had
sense to comprehend heathcliff's disposition: to know that, though his
exterior was altered, his mind was unchangeable and unchanged.  and he
dreaded that mind: it revolted him: he shrank forebodingly from the idea
of committing isabella to its keeping.  he would have recoiled still more
had he been aware that her attachment rose unsolicited, and was bestowed
where it awakened no reciprocation of sentiment; for the minute he
discovered its existence he laid the blame on heathcliff's deliberate
designing.

we had all remarked
 
 ___________________________
 
 to exclaim, instantly,
that her health was perfect, and it was only catherine's harshness which
made her unhappy.

'how can you say i am harsh, you naughty fondling?' cried the mistress,
amazed at the unreasonable assertion.  'you are surely losing your
reason.  when have i been harsh, tell me?'

'yesterday,' sobbed isabella, 'and now!'

'yesterday!' said her sister-in-law.  'on what occasion?'

'in our walk along the moor: you told me to ramble where i pleased, while
you sauntered on with mr. heathcliff!'

'and that's your notion of harshness?' said catherine, laughing.  'it was
no hint that your company was superfluous?  we didn't care whether you
kept with us or not; i merely thought heathcliff's talk would have
nothing entertaining for your ears.'

'oh, no,' wept the young lady; 'you wished me away, because you knew i
liked to be there!'

'is she sane?' asked mrs. linton, appealing to me.  'i'll repeat our
conversation, word for word, isabella; and you point out any charm it
could have had 
 
 ___________________________
 
for you.'

'i don't mind the conversation,' she answered: 'i wanted to be with--'

'well?' said catherine, perceiving her hesitate to complete the sentence.

'with him: and i won't be always sent off!' she continued, kindling up.
'you are a dog in the manger, cathy, and desire no one to be loved but
yourself!'

'you are an impertinent little monkey!' exclaimed mrs. linton, in
surprise.  'but i'll not believe this idiotcy!  it is impossible that you
can covet the admiration of heathcliff--that you consider him an
agreeable person!  i hope i have misunderstood you, isabella?'

'no, you have not,' said the infatuated girl.  'i love him more than ever
you loved edgar, and he might love me, if you would let him!'

'i wouldn't be you for a kingdom, then!' catherine declared,
emphatically: and she seemed to speak sincerely.  'nelly, help me to
convince her of her madness.  tell her what heathcliff is: an unreclaimed
creature, without refinement, without cultivation; an arid wildernes
 
 ___________________________
 
us friend!'

'ah! you won't believe me, then?' said catherine.  'you think i speak
from wicked selfishness?'

'i'm certain you do,' retorted isabella; 'and i shudder at you!'

'good!' cried the other.  'try for yourself, if that be your spirit: i
have done, and yield the argument to your saucy insolence.'--

'and i must suffer for her egotism!' she sobbed, as mrs. linton left the
room.  'all, all is against me: she has blighted my single consolation.
but she uttered falsehoods, didn't she?  mr. heathcliff is not a fiend:
he has an honourable soul, and a true one, or how could he remember her?'

'banish him from your thoughts, miss,' i said.  'he's a bird of bad omen:
no mate for you.  mrs. linton spoke strongly, and yet i can't contradict
her.  she is better acquainted with his heart than i, or any one besides;
and she never would represent him as worse than he is.  honest people
don't hide their deeds.  how has he been living? how has he got rich? why
is he staying at wuthering heights, the hou
 
 ___________________________
 
eek ago--it
was joseph who told me--i met him at gimmerton: "nelly," he said, "we's
hae a crowner's 'quest enow, at ahr folks'.  one on 'em 's a'most getten
his finger cut off wi' hauding t' other fro' stickin' hisseln loike a
cawlf.  that's maister, yeah knaw, 'at 's soa up o' going tuh t' grand
'sizes.  he's noan feared o' t' bench o' judges, norther paul, nur peter,
nur john, nur matthew, nor noan on 'em, not he!  he fair likes--he langs
to set his brazened face agean 'em!  and yon bonny lad heathcliff, yah
mind, he's a rare 'un.  he can girn a laugh as well 's onybody at a
raight divil's jest.  does he niver say nowt of his fine living amang us,
when he goes to t' grange?  this is t' way on 't:--up at sun-down: dice,
brandy, cloised shutters, und can'le-light till next day at noon: then,
t'fooil gangs banning und raving to his cham'er, makking dacent fowks dig
thur fingers i' thur lugs fur varry shame; un' the knave, why he can
caint his brass, un' ate, un' sleep, un' off to his neighbour's 
 
 ___________________________
 
to gossip
wi' t' wife.  i' course, he tells dame catherine how her fathur's goold
runs into his pocket, and her fathur's son gallops down t' broad road,
while he flees afore to oppen t' pikes!"  now, miss linton, joseph is an
old rascal, but no liar; and, if his account of heathcliff's conduct be
true, you would never think of desiring such a husband, would you?'

'you are leagued with the rest, ellen!' she replied.  'i'll not listen to
your slanders.  what malevolence you must have to wish to convince me
that there is no happiness in the world!'

whether she would have got over this fancy if left to herself, or
persevered in nursing it perpetually, i cannot say: she had little time
to reflect.  the day after, there was a justice-meeting at the next town;
my master was obli
 
 ___________________________
 
ged to attend; and mr. heathcliff, aware of his
absence, called rather earlier than usual.  catherine and isabella were
sitting in the library, on hostile terms, but silent: the latter alarmed
at her recent indiscretion, and the disclosure she had made of her secret
feelings in a transient fit of passion; the former, on mature
consideration, really offended with her companion; and, if she laughed
again at her pertness, inclined to make it no laughing matter to her.  she
did laugh as she saw heathcliff pass the window.  i was sweeping the
hearth, and i noticed a mischievous smile on her lips.  isabella,
absorbed in her meditations, or a book, remained till the door opened;
and it was too late to attempt an escape, which she would gladly have
done had it been practicable.

'come in, that's right!' exclaimed the mistress, gaily, pulling a chair
to the fire.  'here are two people sadly in need of a third to thaw the
ice between them; and you are the very one we should both of us choose.
heathcli
 
 ___________________________
 
ff, i'm proud to show you, at last, somebody that dotes on you
more than myself.  i expect you to feel flattered.  nay, it's not nelly;
don't look at her!  my poor little sister-in-law is breaking her heart by
mere contemplation of your physical and moral beauty.  it lies in your
own power to be edgar's brother!  no, no, isabella, you sha'n't run off,'
she continued, arresting, with feigned playfulness, the confounded girl,
who had risen indignantly.  'we were quarrelling like cats about you,
heathcliff; and i was fairly beaten in protestations of devotion and
admiration: and, moreover, i was informed that if i would but have the
manners to stand aside, my rival, as she will have herself to be, would
shoot a shaft into your soul that would fix you for ever, and send my
image into eternal oblivion!'

'catherine!' said isabella, calling up her dignity, and disdaining to
struggle from the tight grasp that held her, 'i'd thank you to adhere to
the truth and not slander me, even in joke!  mr. heath
 
 ___________________________
 
ff, be kind
enough to bid this friend of yours release me: she forgets that you and i
are not intimate acquaintances; and what amuses her is painful to me
beyond expression.'

as the guest answered nothing, but took his seat, and looked thoroughly
indifferent what sentiments she cherished concerning him, she turned and
whispered an earnest appeal for liberty to her tormentor.

'by no means!' cried mrs. linton in answer.  'i won't be named a dog in
the manger again.  you _shall_ stay: now then!  heathcliff, why don't you
evince satisfaction at my pleasant news?  isabella swears that the love
edgar has for me is nothing to that she entertains for you.  i'm sure she
made some speech of the kind; did she not, ellen?  and she has fasted
ever since the day before yesterday's walk, from sorrow and rage that i
despatched her out of your society under the idea of its being
unacceptable.'

'i think you belie her,' said heathcliff, twisting his chair to face
them.  'she wishes to be out of my society now, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 catherine; and perceiving that
as fast as she raised one finger off her arm another closed down, and she
could not remove the whole together, she began to make use of her nails;
and their sharpness presently ornamented the detainer's with crescents of
red.

'there's a tigress!' exclaimed mrs. linton, setting her free, and shaking
her hand with pain.  'begone, for god's sake, and hide your vixen face!
how foolish to reveal those talons to him.  can't you fancy the
conclusions he'll draw?  look, heathcliff! they are instruments that will
do execution--you must beware of your eyes.'

'i'd wrench them off her fingers, if they ever menaced me,' he answered,
brutally, when the door had closed after her.  'but what did you mean by
teasing the creature in that manner, cathy?  you were not speaking the
truth, were you?'

'i assure you i was,' she returned.  'she has been dying for your sake
several weeks, and raving about you this morning, and pouring forth a
deluge of abuse, because i represented your 
 
 ___________________________
 
failings in a plain light,
for the purpose of mitigating her adoration.  but don't notice it
further: i wished to punish her sauciness, that's all.  i like her too
well, my dear heathcliff, to let you absolutely seize and devour her up.'

'and i like her too ill to attempt it,' said he, 'except in a very
ghoulish fashion.  you'd hear of odd things if i lived alone with that
mawkish, waxen face: the most ordinary would be painting on its white the
colours of the rainbow, and turning the blue eyes black, every day or
two: they detestably resemble linton's.'

'delectably!' observed catherine.  'they are dove's eyes--angel's!'

'she's her brother's heir, is she not?' he asked, after 
 
 ___________________________
 
a brief silence.

'i should be sorry to think so,' returned his companion.  'half a dozen
nephews shall erase her title, please heaven!  abstract your mind from
the subject at present: you are too prone to covet your neighbour's
goods; remember _this_ neighbour's goods are mine.'

'if they were _mine_, they would be none the less that,' said heathcliff;
'but though isabella linton may be silly, she is scarcely mad; and, in
short, we'll dismiss the matter, as you advise.'

from their tongues they did dismiss it; and catherine, probably, from her
thoughts.  the other, i felt certain, recalled it often in the course of
the evening.  i saw him smile to himself--grin rather--and lapse into
ominous musing whenever mrs. linton had occasion to be absent from the
apartment.

i determined to watch his movements.  my heart invariably cleaved to the
mast
 
 ___________________________
 
er's, in preference to catherine's side: with reason i imagined, for
he was kind, and trustful, and honourable; and she--she could not be
called _opposite_, yet she seemed to allow herself such wide latitude,
that i had little faith in her principles, and still less sympathy for
her feelings.  i wanted something to happen which might have the effect
of freeing both wuthering heights and the grange of mr. heathcliff
quietly; leaving us as we had been prior to his advent.  his visits were
a continual nightmare to me; and, i suspected, to my master also.  his
abode at the heights was an oppression past explaining.  i felt that god
had forsaken the stray sheep there to its own wicked wanderings, and an
evil beast prowled between it and the fold, waiting his time to spring
and destroy.




chapter xi


sometimes, while meditating on these things in solitude, i've got up in a
sudden terror, and put on my bonnet
 
 ___________________________
 
urate, and thee!  gie me that,' he replied.

'tell us where you got your lessons, and you shall have it,' said i.
'who's your master?'

'devil daddy,' was his answer.

'and what do you learn from daddy?' i continued.

he jumped at the fruit; i raised it higher.  'what does he teach you?' i
asked.

'naught,' said he, 'but to keep out of his gait.  daddy cannot bide me,
because i swear at him.'

'ah! and the devil teaches you to swear at daddy?' i observed.

'ay--nay,' he drawled.

'who, then?'

'heathcliff.'

'i asked if he liked mr. heathcliff.'

'ay!' he answered again.

desiring to have his reasons for liking him, i could only gather the
sentences--'i known't: he pays dad back what he gies to me--he curses
daddy for cursing me.  he says i mun do as i will.'

'and the curate does not teach you to read and write, then?' i pursued.

'no, i was told the curate should have his--teeth dashed down his--throat,
if he stepped over the threshold--heathcliff had promised that!'

i put the orange in his h
 
 ___________________________
 
and, and bade him tell his father that a woman
called nelly dean was waiting to speak with him, by the garden gate.  he
went up the walk, and entered the house; but, instead of hindley,
heathcliff appeared on the door-stones; and i turned directly and ran
down the road as hard as ever i could race, making no halt till i gained
the guide-post, and feeling as scared as if i had raised a goblin.  this
is not much connected with miss isabella's affair: except that it urged
me to resolve further on mounting vigilant guard, and doing my utmost to
check the spread of such bad influence at the grange: even though i
should wake a domestic storm, by thwarting mrs. linton's pleasure.

the next time
 
 ___________________________
 
 heathcliff came my young lady chanced to be feeding some
pigeons in the court.  she had never spoken a word to her sister-in-law
for three days; but she had likewise dropped her fretful complaining, and
we found it a great comfort.  heathcliff had not the habit of bestowing a
single unnecessary civility on miss linton, i knew.  now, as soon as he
beheld her, his first precaution was to take a sweeping survey of the
house-front.  i was standing by the kitchen-window, but i drew out of
sight.  he then stepped across the pavement to her, and said something:
she seemed embarrassed, and desirous of getting away; to prevent it, he
laid his hand on her arm.  she averted her face: he apparently put some
question which she had no mind to answ
 
 ___________________________
 
oo, are you?  a
deliberate deceiver.'

'who is, nelly?' said catherine's voice at my elbow: i had been
over-intent on watching the pair outside to mark her entrance.

'your worthless friend!' i answered, warmly: 'the sneaking rascal yonder.
ah, he has caught a glimpse of us--he is coming in!  i wonder will he
have the heart to find a plausible excuse for making love to miss, when
he told you he hated her?'

mrs. linton saw isabella tear herself free, and run into the garden; and
a minute after, heathcliff opened the door.  i couldn't withhold giving
some loose to my indignation; but catherine angrily insisted on silence,
and threatened to order me out of the kitchen, if i dared to be so
presumptuous as to put in my insolent tongue.

'to hear you, people might think you were the mistress!' she cried.  'you
want setting down in your right place!  heathcliff, what are you about,
raising this stir?  i said you must let isabella alone!--i beg you will,
unless you are tired of being received here, and
 
 ___________________________
 
aid catherine, shutting the inner door!  'don't vex me.  why
have you disregarded my request?  did she come across you on purpose?'

'what is it to you?' he growled.  'i have a right to kiss her, if she
chooses; and you have no right to object.  i am not _your_ husband: _you_
needn't be jealous of me!'

'i'm not jealous of you,' replied the mistress; 'i'm jealous for you.
clear your face: you sha'n't scowl at me!  if you like isabella, you
shall marry her.  but do you like her?  tell the truth, heathcliff!
there, you won't answer.  i'm certain you don't.'

'and would mr. linton approve of his sister marrying that man?' i
inquired.

'mr. linton should approve,' returned my lady, decisively.

'he might spare himself the trouble,' said heathcliff: 'i could do as
well without his approbation. and as to you, catherine, i have a mind to
speak a few words now, while we are at it. i want you to be aware that i
_know_ you have treated me infernally--infernally! do you hear? and if
you flatter yourself th
 
 ___________________________
 
ords, you are an idiot: and if you
fancy i'll suffer unrevenged, i'll convince you of the contrary, in a
very little while! meantime, thank you for telling me your
sister-in-law's secret: i swear i'll make the most of it. and stand you
aside!'

'what new phase of his character is this?' exclaimed mrs. linton, in
amazement.  'i've treated you infernally--and you'll take your revenge!
how will you take it, ungrateful brute?  how have i treated you
infernally?'

'i seek no revenge on you,' replied heathcliff, less vehemently.  'that's
not the plan.  the tyrant grinds down his slaves and they don't turn
against him; they crush those beneath them.  you are welcome to torture
me to death for your amusement, only allow me to amuse myself a little in
the same style, and refrain from insult as much as you are able.  having
levelled my palace, don't erect a hovel and complacently admire your own
charity in giving me that for a home.  if i imagined you really wished me
to marry isabel, i'd cut my throat!'

 
 ___________________________
 

'oh, the evil is that i am _not_ jealous, is it?' cried catherine.  'well,
i won't repeat my offer of a wife: it is as bad as offering satan a lost
soul.  your bliss lies, like his, in inflicting misery.  you prove it.
edgar is restored from the ill-temper he gave way to at your coming; i
begin to be secure and tranquil; and you, restless to know us at peace,
appear resolved on exciting a quarrel.  quarrel with edgar, if you
please, heathcliff, and deceive his sister: you'll hit on exactly the
most efficient method of revenging yourself on me.'

the conversation ceased.  mrs. linton sat down by the fire, flushed and
gloomy.  the spirit which served her was growing intractable: she could
neither lay nor control it.  he stood on the hearth with folded arms,
brooding on his evil thoughts; and in this position i left them to seek
the master, who was wondering what kept catherine below so long.

'ellen,' said he, when i entered, 'have you
 
 ___________________________
 
 seen your mistress?'

'yes; she's in the kitchen, sir,' i answered.  'she's sadly put out by
mr. heathcliff's behaviour: and, indeed, i do think it's time to arrange
his visits on another footing.  there's harm in being too soft, and now
it's come to this--.'  and i related the scene in the court, and, as near
as i dared, the whole subsequent dispute.  i fancied it could not be very
prejudicial to mrs. linton; unless she made it so afterwards, by assuming
the defensive for her guest.  edgar linton had difficulty in hearing me
to the close.  his first words revealed that he did not clear his wife of
b
 
 ___________________________
 
lame.

'this is insufferable!' he exclaimed.  'it is disgraceful that she should
own him for a friend, and force his company on me!  call me two men out
of the hall, ellen.  catherine shall linger no longer to argue with the
low ruffian--i have humoured her enough.'

he descended, and bidding the servants wait in the passage, went,
followed by me, to the kitchen.  its occupants had recommenced their
angry discussion: mrs. linton, at least, was scolding with renewed
vigour; heathcliff had moved to the window, and hung his head, somewhat
cowed by her violent rating apparently.  he saw the master first, and
made a hasty motion that she should be silent; which she obeyed,
abruptly, on discovering the reason of his intimation.

'how is this?' said linton, addressing her; 'what notion of propriety
must you have to remain here, after the language which has been held to
you by that blackguard?  i suppose, because it is his ordinary talk you
think nothing of it: you are habituated t
 
 ___________________________
 
o his baseness, and, perhaps,
imagine i can get used to it too!'

'have you been listening at the door, edgar?' asked the mistress, in a
tone particularly calculated to provoke her husband, implying both
carelessness and contempt of his irritation.  heathcliff, who had raised
his eyes at the former speech, gave a sneering laugh at the latter; on
purpose, it seemed, to draw mr. linton's attention to him.  he succeeded;
but edgar did not mean to entertain him with any high flights of passion.

'i've been so far forbearing with you, sir,' he said quietly; 'not that i
was ignorant of your miserable, degraded character, but i felt you were
only partly responsible for that; and catherine wishing to keep up your
acquaintance, i acquiesced--foolishly.  your 
 
 ___________________________
 
presence is a moral poison
that would contaminate the most virtuous: for that cause, and to prevent
worse consequences, i shall deny you hereafter admission into this house,
and give notice now that i require your instant departure.  three
minutes' delay will render it involuntary and ignominious.

heathcliff measured the height and breadth of the speaker with an eye
full of derision.

'cathy, this lamb of yours threatens like a bull!' he said.  'it is in
danger of splitting its skull against my knuckles.  by god!  mr. linton,
i'm mortally sorry that you are not worth knocking down!'

my master glanced towards the passage, and signed me to fetch the men: he
had no intention of hazarding a personal encounter.  i obeyed the hint;
but mrs. linton, suspecting something, followed; and when i attempted to
 
 ___________________________
 
nswer to her husband's look of angry
surprise.  'if you have not courage to attack him, make an apology, or
allow yourself to be beaten.  it will correct you of feigning more valour
than you possess.  no, i'll swallow the key before you shall get it!  i'm
delightfully rewarded for my kindness to each!  after constant indulgence
of one's weak nature, and the other's bad one, i earn for thanks two
samples of blind ingratitude, stupid to absurdity!  edgar, i was
defending you and yours; and i wish heathcliff may flog you sick, for
daring to think an evil thought of me!'

it did not need the medium of a flogging to produce that effect on the
master.  he tried to wrest the key from catherine's grasp, and for safety
she flung it into the hottest part of the fire; whereupon mr. edgar was
taken with a nervous trembling, and his countenance grew deadly pale.  for
his life he could not avert that excess of emotion: mingled anguish and
humiliation overcame him completely.  he leant on the back of a chair,

 
 ___________________________
 
and covered his face.

'oh, heavens!  in old days this would win you knighthood!' exclaimed mrs.
linton.  'we are vanquished! we are vanquished!  heathcliff would as soon
lift a finger at you as the king would march his army against a colony of
mice.  cheer up! you sha'n't be hurt!  your type is not a lamb, it's a
sucking leveret.'

'i wish you joy of the milk-blooded coward, cathy!' said her friend.  'i
compliment you on your taste.  and that is the slavering, shivering thing
you preferred to me!  i would not strike him with my fist, but i'd kick
him with my foot, and experience considerable satisfaction.  is he
weeping, or is he going to faint fo
 
 ___________________________
 
istance: my master quickly sprang erect, and
struck him full on the throat a blow that would have levelled a slighter
man.  it took his breath for a minute; and while he choked, mr. linton
walked out by the back door into the yard, and from thence to the front
entrance.

'there! you've done with coming here,' cried catherine.  'get away, now;
he'll return with a brace of pistols and half-a-dozen assistants.  if he
did overhear us, of course he'd never forgive you.  you've played me an
ill turn, heathcliff!  but go--make haste!  i'd rather see edgar at bay
than you.'

'do you suppose i'm going with that blow burning in my gullet?' he
thundered.  'by hell, no!  i'll crush his ribs in like a rotten hazel-nut
before i cross the threshold!  if i don't floor him now, i shall murder
him some time; so, as you value his existence, let me get at him!'

'he is not coming,' i interposed, framing a bit of a lie.  'there's the
coachman and the two gardeners; you'll surely not wait to be thrust into
the road b
 
 ___________________________
 
y them!  each has a bludgeon; and master will, very likely, be
watching from the parlour-windows to see that they fulfil his orders.'

the gardeners and coachman were there: but linton was with them.  they
had already entered the court.  heathcliff, on the second thoughts,
resolved to avoid a struggle against three underlings: he seized the
poker, smashed the lock from the inner door, and made his escape as they
tramped in.

mrs. linton, who was very much excited, bade me accompany her up-stairs.
she did not know my share in contributing to the disturbance, and i was
anxious to keep her in ignorance.

'i'm nearly distracted, nelly!' she exclaimed, throwing herself on the
sofa.  'a thousand smiths' hammers are beating in my head!  tell isa
 
 ___________________________
 
ger at present, i shall get wild.  and, nelly, say to
edgar, if you see him again to-night, that i'm in danger of being
seriously ill.  i wish it may prove true.  he has startled and distressed
me shockingly!  i want to frighten him.  besides, he might come and begin
a string of abuse or complainings; i'm certain i should recriminate, and
god knows where we should end!  will you do so, my good nelly?  you are
aware that i am no way blamable in this matter.  what possessed him to
turn listener?  heathcliff's talk was outrageous, after you left us; but
i could soon have diverted him from isabella, and the rest meant nothing.
now all is dashed wrong; by the fool's craving to hear evil of self, that
haunts some people like a demon!  had edgar never gathered our
conversation, he would never have been the worse for it.  really, when he
opened on me in that unreasonable tone of displeasure after i had scolded
heathcliff till i was hoarse for him, i did not care hardly what they did
to each other; espec
 
 ___________________________
 
ially as i felt that, however the scene closed, we
should all be driven asunder for nobody knows how long!  well, if i
cannot keep heathcliff for my friend--if edgar will be mean and jealous,
i'll try to break their hearts by breaking my own.  that will be a prompt
way of finishing all, when i am pushed to extremity!  but it's a deed to
be reserved for a forlorn hope; i'd not take linton by surprise with it.
to this point he has been discreet in dreading to provoke me; you must
represent the peril of quitting that policy, and remind him of my
passionate temper, verging, when kindled, on frenzy.  i wish you could
dismiss that apathy o
 
 ___________________________
 
timacy with--'

'oh, for mercy's sake,' interrupted the mistress, stamping her foot, 'for
mercy's sake, let us hear no more of it now!  your cold blood cannot be
worked into a fever: your veins are full of ice-water; but mine are
boiling, and the sight of such chillness makes them dance.'

'to get rid of me, answer my question,' persevered mr. linton.  'you must
answer it; and that violence does not alarm me.  i have found that you
can be as stoical as anyone, when you please.  will you give up
heathcliff hereafter, or will you give up me?  it is impossible for you
to be _my_ friend and _his_ at the same time; and i absolutely _require_
to know which you choose.'

'i require to be let alone!' exclaimed catherine, furiously.  'i demand
it!  don't you see i can scarcely stand?  edgar, you--you leave me!'

she rang the bell till it broke with a twang; i entered leisurely.  it
was enough to try the temper of a saint, such senseless, wicked rages!
there she lay dashing her head against the arm of the
 
 ___________________________
 
t
me.

as she never offered to descend to breakfast next morning, i went to ask
whether she would have some carried up.  'no!' she replied, peremptorily.
the same question was repeated at dinner and tea; and again on the morrow
after, and received the same answer.  mr. linton, on his part, spent his
time in the library, and did not inquire concerning his wife's
occupations.  isabella and he had had an hour's interview, during which
he tried to elicit from her some sentiment of proper horror for
heathcliff's advances: but he could make nothing of her evasive replies,
and was obliged to close the examination unsatisfactorily; adding,
however, a solemn warning, that if she were so insane as to encourage
that worthless suitor, it would dissolve all bonds of relationship
between herself and him.




chapter xii


while miss linton moped about the park and garden, always silent, and
almost always in tears; and her brother shut himself up among books that
he never opened--wearying, i guessed, with a co
 
 ___________________________
 
 put pigeons' feathers in the pillows--no
wonder i couldn't die!  let me take care to throw it on the floor when i
lie down.  and here is a moor-cock's; and this--i should know it among a
thousand--it's a lapwing's.  bonny bird; wheeling over our heads in the
middle of the moor.  it wanted to get to its nest, for the clouds had
touched the swells, and it felt rain coming.  this feather was picked up
from the heath, the bird was not shot: we saw its nest in the winter,
full of little skeletons.  heathcliff set a trap over it, and the old
ones dared not come.  i made him promise he'd never shoot a lapwing after
that, and he didn't.  yes, here are more!  did he shoot my lapwings,
nelly?  are they red, any of them?  let me look.'

'give over with that baby-work!' i interrupted, dragging the pillow away,
and turning the holes towards the mattress, for she was removing its
contents by handfuls.  'lie down and shut your eyes: you're wandering.
there's a mess!  the down is flying about like snow.'

i we
 
 ___________________________
 
g, and my eyes dimly discerning
the grey square of the window, that i was enclosed in the oak-panelled
bed at home; and my heart ached with some great grief which, just
waking, i could not recollect. i pondered, and worried myself to
discover what it could be, and, most strangely, the whole last seven
years of my life grew a blank! i did not recall that they had been at
all. i was a child; my father was just buried, and my misery arose from
the separation that hindley had ordered between me and heathcliff. i was
laid alone, for the first time; and, rousing from a dismal doze after a
night of weeping, i lifted my hand to push the panels aside: it struck
the table-top! i swept it along the carpet, and then memory burst in: my
late anguish was swallowed in a paroxysm of despair. i cannot say why i
felt so wildly wretched: it must have been temporary derangement; for
there is scarcely cause. but, supposing at twelve years old i had been
wrenched from the heights, and every early association, and my 
 
 ___________________________
 
all in
all, as heathcliff was at that time, and been converted at a stroke into
mrs. linton, the lady of thrushcross grange, and the wife of a stranger:
an exile, and outcast, thenceforth, from what had been my world. you may
fancy a glimpse of the abyss where i grovelled! shake your head as you
will, nelly, you have helped to unsettle me! you should have spoken to
edgar, indeed you should, and compelled him to leave me quiet! oh, i'm
burning! i wish i were out of doors! i wish i were a girl again, half
savage and hardy
 
 ___________________________
 

shining.

'look!' she cried eagerly, 'that's my room with the candle in it, and the
trees swaying before it; and the other candle is in joseph's garret.
joseph sits up late, doesn't he?  he's waiting till i come home that he
may lock the gate.  well, he'll wait a while yet.  it's a rough journey,
and a sad heart to travel it; and we must pass by gimmerton kirk to go
that journey!  we've braved its ghosts often together, and dared each
other to stand among the graves and ask them to come.  but, heathcliff,
if i dare you now, will you venture?  if you do, i'll keep you.  i'll not
lie there by myself: they may bury me twelve feet deep, and throw the
church down over me, but i won't rest till you are with me.  i never
will!'

she paused, and resumed with a strange smile.  'he's considering--he'd
rather i'd come to him!  find a way, then! not through that kirkyard.  you
are slow!  be content, you always followed me!'

perceiving it vain to argue against her insanity, i was planning how i
could reach
 
 ___________________________
 
.  'you knew
your mistress's nature, and you encouraged me to harass her.  and not to
give me one hint of how she has been these three days!  it was heartless!
months of sickness could not cause such a change!'

i began to defend myself, thinking it too bad to be blamed for another's
wicked waywardness.  'i knew mrs. linton's nature to be headstrong and
domineering,' cried i: 'but i didn't know that you wished to foster her
fierce temper!  i didn't know that, to humour her, i should wink at mr.
heathcliff.  i performed the duty of a faithful servant in telling you,
and i have got a faithful servant's wages!  well, it will teach me to be
careful next time.  next time you may gather intelligence for yourself!'

'the next time you bring a tale to me you shall quit my service, ellen
dean,' he replied.

'you'd rather hear nothing about it, i suppose, then, mr. linton?' said
i.  'heathcliff has your permission to come a-courting to miss, and to
drop in at every opportunity your absence offers, on purp
 
 ___________________________
 
rds, she
refused to eat, and now she alternately raves and remains in a half
dream; knowing those about her, but having her mind filled with all sorts
of strange ideas and illusions.'

'mr. linton will be sorry?' observed kenneth, interrogatively.

'sorry? he'll break his heart should anything happen!' i replied.  'don't
alarm him more than necessary.'

'well, i told him to beware,' said my companion; 'and he must bide the
consequences of neglecting my warning!  hasn't he been intimate with mr.
heathcliff lately?'

'heathcliff frequently visits at the grange,' answered i, 'though more on
the strength of the mistress having known him when a boy, than because
the master likes his company.  at present he's discharged from the
trouble of calling; owing to some presumptuous aspirations after miss
linton which he manifested.  i hardly think he'll be taken in again.'

'and does miss linton turn a cold shoulder on him?' was the doctor's next
question.

'i'm not in her confidence,' returned i, reluctant 
 
 ___________________________
 
to continue the
subject.

'no, she's a sly one,' he remarked, shaking his head.  'she keeps her own
counsel!  but she's a real little fool.  i have it from good authority
that last night (and a pretty night it was!) she and heathcliff were
walking in the plantation at the back of your house above two hours; and
he pressed her not to go in again, but just mount his horse and away with
him!  my informant said she could only put him off by pledging her word
of honour to be prepared on their first meeting after that: when it was
to be he didn't hear; but you urge mr. linton to look sharp!'

this news filled me with fresh fears; i outstripped kenneth, and ran most
of the way back.  the little dog was yelping in the garden yet.  i
 
 ___________________________
 
but i was spared the pain of being
the first proclaimant of her flight.  one of the maids, a thoughtless
girl, who had been on an early errand to gimmerton, came panting
up-stairs, open-mouthed, and dashed into the chamber, crying: 'oh, dear,
dear!  what mun we have next?  master, master, our young lady--'

'hold your noise!' cried, i hastily, enraged at her clamorous manner.

'speak lower, mary--what is the matter?' said mr. linton.  'what ails
your young lady?'

'she's gone, she's gone!  yon' heathcliff's run off wi' her!' gasped the
girl.

'that is not true!' exclaimed linton, rising in agitation.  'it cannot
be: how has the idea entered your head?  ellen dean, go and seek her.  it
is incredible: it cannot be.'

as he spoke he took the servant to the door, and then repeated his demand
to know her reasons for such an assertion.

'why, i met on the road a lad that fetches milk here,' she stammered,
'and he asked whether we weren't in trouble at the grange.  i thought he
meant for missis's sickn
 
 ___________________________
 
ess, so i answered, yes.  then says he, "there's
somebody gone after 'em, i guess?"  i stared.  he saw i knew nought about
it, and he told how a gentleman and lady had stopped to have a horse's
shoe fastened at a blacksmith's shop, two miles out of gimmerton, not
very long after midnight! and how the blacksmith's lass had got up to spy
who they were: she knew them both directly.  and she noticed the
man--heathcliff it was, she felt certain: nob'dy could mistake him,
besides--put a sovereign in her father's hand for payment.  the lady had
a cloak about her face; but having desired a sup of water, while she
drank it fell back, and she saw her very plain.  heathcliff held both
bridles as they rode on, and they set their faces from the village, and
went as fast as the rough roads would let them.  the lass said nothing to
her father, but she told it all over gimmerton this morning.'

i ran and peeped, for form
 
 ___________________________
 
gh to move
from one to the other, leaning on edgar's arm.  ah, i thought myself, she
might recover, so waited on as she was.  and there was double cause to
desire it, for on her existence depended that of another: we cherished
the hope that in a little while mr. linton's heart would be gladdened,
and his lands secured from a stranger's grip, by the birth of an heir.

i should mention that isabella sent to her brother, some six weeks from
her departure, a short note, announcing her marriage with heathcliff.  it
appeared dry and cold; but at the bottom was dotted in with pencil an
obscure apology, and an entreaty for kind remembrance and reconciliation,
if her proceeding had offended him: asserting that she could not help it
then, and being done, she had now no power to repeal it.  linton did not
reply to this, i believe; and, in a fortnight more, i got a long letter,
which i considered odd, coming from the pen of a bride just out of the
honeymoon.  i'll read it: for i keep it yet.  any relic of t
 
 ___________________________
 
rlined)--they need not
expect me, and they may draw what conclusions they please; taking care,
however, to lay nothing at the door of my weak will or deficient
affection.

the remainder of the letter is for yourself alone.  i want to ask you two
questions: the first is,--how did you contrive to preserve the common
sympathies of human nature when you resided here?  i cannot recognise any
sentiment which those around share with me.

the second question i have great interest in; it is this--is mr.
heathcliff a man?  if so, is he mad?  and if not, is he a devil?  i
sha'n't tell my reasons for making this inquiry; but i beseech you to
explain, if you can, what i have married: that is, when you call to see
me; and you must call, ellen, very soon.  don't write, but come, and
bring me something from edgar.

now, you shall hear how i have been received in my new home, as i am led
to imagine the heights will be.  it is to amuse myself that i dwell on
such subjects as the lack of external comforts: they ne
 
 ___________________________
 
d; so it was dark when we dismounted in the paved yard of
the farm-house, and your old fellow-servant, joseph, issued out to
receive us by the light of a dip candle.  he did it with a courtesy that
redounded to his credit.  his first act was to elevate his torch to a
level with my face, squint malignantly, project his under-lip, and turn
away.  then he took the two horses, and led them into the stables;
reappearing for the purpose of locking the outer gate, as if we lived in
an ancient castle.

heathcliff stayed to speak to him, and i entered the kitchen--a dingy,
untidy hole; i daresay you would not know it, it is so changed since it
was in your charge.  by the fire stood a ruffianly child, strong in limb
and dirty in garb, with a look of catherine in his eyes and about his
mouth.

'this is edgar's legal nephew,' i reflected--'mine in a manner; i must
shake hands, and--yes--i must kiss him.  it is right to establish a good
understanding at the beginning.'

i approached, and, attempting to take 
 
 ___________________________
 
dear?'

he replied in a jargon i did not comprehend.

'shall you and i be friends, hareton?' was my next essay at conversation.

an oath, and a threat to set throttler on me if i did not 'frame off'
rewarded my perseverance.

'hey, throttler, lad!' whispered the little wretch, rousing a half-bred
bull-dog from its lair in a corner.  'now, wilt thou be ganging?' he
asked authoritatively.

love for my life urged a compliance; i stepped over the threshold to wait
till the others should enter.  mr. heathcliff was nowhere visible; and
joseph, whom i followed to the stables, and requested to accompany me in,
after staring and muttering to himself, screwed up his nose and
replied--'mim! mim! mim!  did iver christian body hear aught like it?
mincing un' munching!  how can i tell whet ye say?'

'i say, i wish you to come with me into the house!' i cried, thinking him
deaf, yet highly disgusted at his rudeness.

'none o' me!  i getten summut else to do,' he answered, and continued his
work; moving his lan
 
 ___________________________
 
 in hopes some more civil servant might
show himself.  after a short suspense, it was opened by a tall, gaunt
man, without neckerchief, and otherwise extremely slovenly; his features
were lost in masses of shaggy hair that hung on his shoulders; and _his_
eyes, too, were like a ghostly catherine's with all their beauty
annihilated.

'what's your business here?' he demanded, grimly.  'who are you?'

'my name was isabella linton,' i replied.  'you've seen me before, sir.
i'm lately married to mr. heathcliff, and he has brought me here--i
suppose, by your permission.'

'is he come back, then?' asked the hermit, glaring like a hungry wolf.

'yes--we came just now,' i said; 'but he left me by the kitchen door; and
when i would have gone in, your little boy played sentinel over the
place, and frightened me off by the help of a bull-dog.'

'it's well the hellish villain has kept his word!' growled my future
host, searching the darkness beyond me in expectation of discovering
heathcliff; and then he ind
 
 ___________________________
 
rless,
seated in worse than solitude on that inhospitable hearth, and
remembering that four miles distant lay my delightful home, containing
the only people i loved on earth; and there might as well be the
atlantic to part us, instead of those four miles: i could not overpass
them! i questioned with myself--where must i turn for comfort? and--mind
you don't tell edgar, or catherine--above every sorrow beside, this rose
pre-eminent: despair at finding nobody who could or would be my ally
against heathcliff! i had sought shelter at wuthering heights, almost
gladly, because i was secured by that arrangement from living alone with
him; but he knew the people we were coming amongst, and he did not fear
their intermeddling.

i sat and thought a doleful time: the clock struck eight, and nine, and
still my companion paced to and fro, his head bent on his breast, and
perfectly silent, unless a groan or a bitter ejaculation forced itself
out at intervals.  i listened to detect a woman's voice in the house
 
 ___________________________
 
ly i grieved, till earnshaw halted opposite, in his
measured walk, and gave me a stare of newly-awakened surprise.  taking
advantage of his recovered attention, i exclaimed--'i'm tired with my
journey, and i want to go to bed!  where is the maid-servant?  direct me
to her, as she won't come to me!'

'we have none,' he answered; 'you must wait on yourself!'

'where must i sleep, then?' i sobbed; i was beyond regarding
self-respect, weighed down by fatigue and wretchedness.

'joseph will show you heathcliff's chamber,' said he; 'open that
door--he's in there.'

i was going to obey, but he suddenly arrested me, and added in the
strangest tone--'be so good as to turn your lock, and draw your
bolt--don't omit it!'

'well!' i said.  'but why, mr. earnshaw?'  i did not relish the notion of
deliberately fastening myself in with heathcliff.

'look here!' he replied, pulling from his waistcoat a
curiously-constructed pistol, having a double-edged spring knife attached
to the barrel.  'that's a great tempt
 
 ___________________________
 
otion struck me: how
powerful i should be possessing such an instrument!  i took it from his
hand, and touched the blade.  he looked astonished at the expression my
face assumed during a brief second: it was not horror, it was
covetousness.  he snatched the pistol back, jealously; shut the knife,
and returned it to its concealment.

'i don't care if you tell him,' said he.  'put him on his guard, and
watch for him.  you know the terms we are on, i see: his danger does not
shock you.'

'what has heathcliff done to you?' i asked.  'in what has he wronged you,
to warrant this appalling hatred?  wouldn't it be wiser to bid him quit
the house?'

'no!' thundered earnshaw; 'should he offer to leave me, he's a dead man:
persuade him to attempt it, and you are a murderess!  am i to lose _all_,
without a chance of retrieval?  is hareton to be a beggar?  oh,
damnation!  i _will_ have it back; and i'll have _his_ gold too; and then
his blood; and hell shall have his soul!  it will be ten times blacker
with 
 
 ___________________________
 
leaving a wide, bare
space in the middle.

'why, man,' i exclaimed, facing him angrily, 'this is not a place to
sleep in.  i wish to see my bed-room.'

'_bed-rume_!' he repeated, in a tone of mockery. 'yah's see all t'
_bed-rumes_ thear is--yon's mine.'

he pointed into the second garret, only differing from the first in being
more naked about the walls, and having a large, low, curtainless bed,
with an indigo-coloured quilt, at one end.

'what do i want with yours?' i retorted.  'i suppose mr. heathcliff does
not lodge at the top of the house, does he?'

'oh! it's maister _hathecliff's_ ye're wanting?' cried he, as if making a
new discovery.  'couldn't ye ha' said soa, at onst? un' then, i mud ha'
telled ye, baht all this wark, that that's just one ye cannut see--he
allas keeps it locked, un' nob'dy iver mells on't but hisseln.'

'you've a nice house, joseph,' i could not refrain from observing, 'and
pleasant inmates; and i think the concentrated essence of all the madness
in the world took up 
 
 ___________________________
 
. directly
after joseph came up with hareton, to put him to bed. i had found
shelter in hareton's room, and the old man, on seeing me, said,--'they's
rahm for boath ye un' yer pride, now, i sud think i' the hahse. it's
empty; ye may hev' it all to yerseln, un' him as allus maks a third, i'
sich ill company!'

gladly did i take advantage of this intimation; and the minute i flung
myself into a chair, by the fire, i nodded, and slept.  my slumber was
deep and sweet, though over far too soon.  mr. heathcliff awoke me; he
had just come in, and demanded, in his loving manner, what i was doing
there?  i told him the cause of my staying up so late--that he had the
key of our room in his pocket.  the adjective _our_ gave mortal offence.
he swore it was not, nor ever should be, mine; and he'd--but i'll not
repeat his language, nor describe his habitual conduct: he is ingenious
and unresting in seeking to gain my abhorrence!  i sometimes wonder at
him with an intensity that deadens my fear: yet, i assure 
 
 ___________________________
 
en.  you
may call at wuthering heights this afternoon, if you like, and say that i
am not angry, but i'm sorry to have lost her; especially as i can never
think she'll be happy.  it is out of the question my going to see her,
however: we are eternally divided; and should she really wish to oblige
me, let her persuade the villain she has married to leave the country.'

'and you won't write her a little note, sir?' i asked, imploringly.

'no,' he answered.  'it is needless.  my communication with heathcliff's
family shall be as sparing as his with mine.  it shall not exist!'

mr. edgar's coldness depressed me exceedingly; and all the way from the
grange i puzzled my brains how to put more heart into what he said, when
i repeated it; and how to soften his refusal of even a few lines to
console isabella. i daresay she had been on the watch for me since
morning: i saw her looking through the lattice as i came up the garden
causeway, and i nodded to her; but she drew back, as if afraid of being
observ
 
 ___________________________
 
,
dismal scene as the formerly cheerful house presented! i must confess,
that if i had been in the young lady's place, i would, at least, have
swept the hearth, and wiped the tables with a duster. but she already
partook of the pervading spirit of neglect which encompassed her. her
pretty face was wan and listless; her hair uncurled: some locks hanging
lankly down, and some carelessly twisted round her head. probably she
had not touched her dress since yester evening. hindley was not there.
mr. heathcliff sat at a table, turning over some papers in his
pocket-book; but he rose when i appeared, asked me how i did, quite
friendly, and offered me a chair. he was the only thing there that
seemed decent; and i thought he never looked better. so much had
circumstances altered their positions, that he would certainly have
struck a stranger as a born and bred gentleman; and his wife as a
thorough little slattern! she came forward eagerly to greet me, and held
out one hand to take the expected letter. i 
 
 ___________________________
 
shook my head. she wouldn't
understand the hint, but followed me to a sideboard, where i went to lay
my bonnet, and importuned me in a whisper to give her directly what i
had brought. heathcliff guessed the meaning of her manoeuvres, and
said--'if you have got anything for isabella (as no doubt you have,
nelly), give it to her. you needn't make a secret of it: we have no
secrets between us.'

'oh, i have nothing,' i replied, thinking it best to speak the truth at
once.  'my master bid me tell his sister that she must not expect either
a letter or a visit from him at present.  he sends his love, ma'am, and
his wishes for your happiness, and his pardon for the grief you have
occasioned; 
 
 ___________________________
 
but he thinks that after this time his household and the
household here should drop intercommunication, as nothing could come of
keeping it up.'

mrs. heathcliff's lip quivered slightly, and she returned to her seat in
the window.  her husband took his stand on the hearthstone, near me, and
began to put questions concerning catherine.  i told him as much as i
thought proper of her illness, and he extorted from me, by
cross-examination, most of the facts connected with its origin.  i blamed
her, as she deserved, for bringing it all on herself; and ended by hoping
that he would follow mr. linton's example and avoid future interference
with his family, for
 
 ___________________________
 
u'll move out of this country
entirely; and that you may not regret it, i'll inform you catherine
linton is as different now from your old friend catherine earnshaw, as
that young lady is different from me.  her appearance is changed greatly,
her character much more so; and the person who is compelled, of
necessity, to be her companion, will only sustain his affection hereafter
by the remembrance of what she once was, by common humanity, and a sense
of duty!'

'that is quite possible,' remarked heathcliff, forcing himself to seem
calm: 'quite possible that your master should have nothing but common
humanity and a sense of duty to fall back upon.  but do you imagine that
i shall leave catherine to his _duty_ and _humanity_? and can you compare
my feelings respecting catherine to his?  before you leave this house, i
must exact a promise from you that you'll get me an interview with her:
consent, or refuse, i _will_ see her!  what do you say?'

'i say, mr. heathcliff,' i replied, 'you must not: you
 
 ___________________________
 
ed in that horse-trough as her whole affection be monopolised by
him.  tush!  he is scarcely a degree dearer to her than her dog, or her
horse.  it is not in him to be loved like me: how can she love in him
what he has not?'

'catherine and edgar are as fond of each other as any two people can be,'
cried isabella, with sudden vivacity.  'no one has a right to talk in
that manner, and i won't hear my brother depreciated in silence!'

'your brother is wondrous fond of you too, isn't he?' observed
heathcliff, scornfully.  'he turns you adrift on the world with
surprising alacrity.'

'he is not aware of what i suffer,' she replied.  'i didn't tell him
that.'

'you have been telling him something, then: you have written, have you?'

'to say that i was married, i did write--you saw the note.'

'and nothing since?'

'no.'

'my young lady is looking sadly the worse for her change of condition,' i
remarked.  'somebody's love comes short in her case, obviously; whose, i
may guess; but, perhaps, i shouldn'
 
 ___________________________
 
t say.'

'i should guess it was her own,' said heathcliff.  'she degenerates into
a mere slut!  she is tired of trying to please me uncommonly early.  you'd
hardly credit it, but the very morrow of our wedding she was weeping to
go home.  however, she'll suit this house so much the better for not
being over nice, and i'll take care she does not disgrace me by rambling
abroad.'

'well, sir,' returned i, 'i hope you'll consider that mrs. heathcliff is
accustomed to be looked after and waited on; and that she has been
brought up like an only daughter, whom every one was ready to serve.  you
must let her have a maid to keep things tidy about her, and you must
treat her kindly.  whatever be your notion of mr. edgar, you cannot doubt
that she has a capacity for strong attachments, or she wouldn't have
abandoned the elegancies, and comforts, and friends of her former home,
to fix contentedly, in such a wilderness as this, with you.'

'she aban
 
 ___________________________
 
f invention, in my experiments on what she could endure, and still creep
shamefully cringing back!  but tell him, also, to set his fraternal and
magisterial heart at ease: that i keep strictly within the limits of the
law.  i have avoided, up to this period, giving her the slightest right
to claim a separation; and, what's more, she'd thank nobody for dividing
us.  if she desired to go, she might: the nuisance of her presence
outweighs the gratification to be derived from tormenting her!'

'mr. heathcliff,' said i, 'this is the talk of a madman; your wife, most
likely, is convinced you are mad; and, for that reason, she has borne
with you hitherto: but now that you say she may go, she'll doubtless
avail herself of the permission.  you are not so bewitched, ma'am, are
you, as to remain with him of your own accord?'

'take care, ellen!' answered isabella, her eyes sparkling irefully; there
was no misdoubting by their expression the full success of her partner's
endeavours to make himself detested.
 
 ___________________________
 
 but i dare
not repeat it!  only, ellen, promise you'll not mention a syllable of his
infamous conversation to my brother or catherine.  whatever he may
pretend, he wishes to provoke edgar to desperation: he says he has
married me on purpose to obtain power over him; and he sha'n't obtain
it--i'll die first!  i just hope, i pray, that he may forget his
diabolical prudence and kill me!  the single pleasure i can imagine is to
die, or to see him dead!'

'there--that will do for the present!' said heathcliff.  'if you are
called upon in a court of law, you'll remember her language, nelly!  and
take a good look at that countenance: she's near the point which would
suit me.  no; you're not fit to be your own guardian, isabella, now; and
i, being your legal protector, must retain you in my custody, however
distasteful the obligation may be.  go up-stairs; i have something to say
to ellen dean in private.  that's not the way: up-stairs, i tell you!
why, this is the road upstairs, child!'

he seized, an
 
 ___________________________
 
and, besides, i urged the cruelty and selfishness of his destroying mrs.
linton's tranquillity for his satisfaction.  'the commonest occurrence
startles her painfully,' i said.  'she's all nerves, and she couldn't
bear the surprise, i'm positive.  don't persist, sir! or else i shall be
obliged to inform my master of your designs; and he'll take measures to
secure his house and its inmates from any such unwarrantable intrusions!'

'in that case i'll take measures to secure you, woman!' exclaimed
heathcliff; 'you shall not leave wuthering heights till to-morrow
morning.  it is a foolish story to assert that catherine could not bear
to see me; and as to surprising her, i don't desire it: you must prepare
her--ask her if i may come.  you say she never mentions my name, and that
i am never mentioned to her.  to whom should she mention me if i am a
forbidden topic in the house?  she thinks you are all spies for her
husband.  oh, i've no doubt she's in hell among you!  i guess by her
silence, as much a
 
 ___________________________
 
to put the missive into mrs. linton's hand.

but here is kenneth; i'll go down, and tell him how much better you are.
my history is _dree_, as we say, and will serve to while away another
morning.

dree, and dreary!  i reflected as the good woman descended to receive the
doctor: and not exactly of the kind which i should have chosen to amuse
me.  but never mind!  i'll extract wholesome medicines from mrs. dean's
bitter herbs; and firstly, let me beware of the fascination that lurks in
catherine heathcliff's brilliant eyes.  i should be in a curious taking
if i surrendered my heart to that young person, and the daughter turned
out a second edition of the mother.




chapter xv


another week over--and i am so many days nearer health, and spring!  i
have now heard all my neighbour's history, at different sittings, as the
housekeeper could spare time from more important occupations.  i'll
continue it in her own words, only a little condensed.  she is, on the
whole, a very fair narrator, and i don't
 
 ___________________________
 
 think i could improve her style.

in the evening, she said, the evening of my visit to the heights, i knew,
as well as if i saw him, that mr. heathcliff was about the place; and i
shunned going out, because i still carried his letter in my pocket, and
didn't want to be threatened or teased any more.  i had made up my mind
not to give it till my master went somewhere, as i could not guess how
its receipt would affect catherine.  the consequence was, that it did not
reach her before the lapse of three days.  the fourth was sunday, and i
brought it into her room after the family were gone to church.  there was
a manservant left to keep the house w
 
 ___________________________
 
n that the mistress wished very much for some oranges, and he
must run over to the village and get a few, to be paid for on the morrow.
he departed, and i went up-stairs.

mrs. linton sat in a loose white dress, with a light shawl over her
shoulders, in the recess of the open window, as usual.  her thick, long
hair had been partly removed at the beginning of her illness, and now she
wore it simply combed in its natural tresses over her temples and neck.
her appearance was altered, as i had told heathcliff; but when she was
calm, there seemed unearthly beauty in the change.  the flash of her eyes
had been succeeded by a dreamy and melancholy softness; they no longer
gave the impression of looking at the objects around her: they appeared
always to gaze beyond, and far beyond--you would have said out of this
world.  then, the paleness of her face--its haggard aspect having
vanished as she recovered flesh--and the peculiar expression arising from
her mental state, though painfully suggestive of thei
 
 ___________________________
 
y inserting it in
one hand that rested on her knee.  'you must read it immediately, because
it wants an answer.  shall i break the seal?'  'yes,' she answered,
without altering the direction of her eyes.  i opened it--it was very
short.  'now,' i continued, 'read it.'  she drew away her hand, and let
it fall.  i replaced it in her lap, and stood waiting till it should
please her to glance down; but that movement was so long delayed that at
last i resumed--'must i read it, ma'am?  it is from mr. heathcliff.'

there was a start and a troubled gleam of recollection, and a struggle to
arrange her ideas.  she lifted the letter, and seemed to peruse it; and
when she came to the signature she sighed: yet still i found she had not
gathered its import, for, upon my desiring to hear her reply, she merely
pointed to the name, and gazed at me with mournful and questioning
eagerness.

'well, he wishes to see you,' said i, guessing her need of an
interpreter.  'he's in the garden by this time, and impatient t
 
 ___________________________
 
o know
what answer i shall bring.'

as i spoke, i observed a large dog lying on the sunny grass beneath raise
its ears as if about to bark, and then smoothing them back, announce, by
a wag of the tail, that some one approached whom it did not consider a
stranger.  mrs. linton bent forward, and listened breathlessly.  the
minute after a step traversed the hall; the open house was too tempting
for heathcliff to resist walking in: most likely he supposed that i was
inclined to shirk my promise, and so resolved to trust to his own
audacity.  with straining eagerness catherine gazed towards the entrance
of her chamber.  he did not hit the right room directly: she motioned me
to admit him, but he found it out ere i could reach the door, and in a
stride or two was at her side, and had her grasped in his arms.

he neither spoke nor loosed his hold for some five minutes, during which
period he bestowed mo
 
 ___________________________
 
ie.

'oh, cathy!  oh, my life! how can i bear it?' was the first sentence he
uttered, in a tone that did not seek to disguise his despair.  and now he
stared at her so earnestly that i thought the very intensity of his gaze
would bring tears into his eyes; but they burned with anguish: they did
not melt.

'what now?' said catherine, leaning back, and returning his look with a
suddenly clouded brow: her humour was a mere vane for constantly varying
caprices.  'you and edgar have broken my heart, heathcliff!  and you both
come to bewail the deed to me, as if you were the people to be pitied!  i
shall not pity you, not i.  you have killed me--and thriven on it, i
think.  how strong you are!  how many years do you mean to live after i
am gone?'

heathcliff had knelt on one knee to embrace her; he attempted to rise,
but she seized his hair, and kept him down.

'i wish i could hold you,' she continued, bitterly, 'till we were both
dead!  i shouldn't care what you suffered.  i care nothing for your
suf
 
 ___________________________
 
ferings.  why shouldn't you suffer?  i do!  will you forget me?  will
you be happy when i am in the earth?  will you say twenty years hence,
"that's the grave of catherine earnshaw?  i loved her long ago, and was
wretched to lose her; but it is past.  i've loved many others since: my
children are dearer to me than she was; and, at death, i shall not
rejoice that i am going to her: i shall be sorry that i must leave
them!"  will you say so, heathcliff?'

'don't torture me till i'm as mad as yourself,' cried he, wrenching his
head free, and grinding his teeth.

the two, to a cool spectator, made a strange and fearful picture.  well
might catherine deem that heaven would be a land of exile to her, unless
with her mortal body she cast away her moral character also.  her present
countenance had a wild vindictiveness in its white cheek, and a bloodless
lip and scintillating eye; and she retained in her closed fingers a
portion of the locks she ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ould as soon forget you as my existence!  is it not
sufficient for your infernal selfishness, that while you are at peace i
shall writhe in the torments of hell?'

'i shall not be at peace,' moaned catherine, recalled to a sense of
physical weakness by the violent, unequal throbbing of her heart, which
beat visibly and audibly under this excess of agitation.  she said
nothing further till the paroxysm was over; then she continued, more
kindly--

'i'm not wishing you greater torment than i have, heathcliff.  i only
wish us never to be parted: and should a word of mine distress you
hereafter, think i feel the same distress underground, and for my own
sake, forgive me!  come here and kneel down again!  you never harmed me
in your life.  nay, if you nurse anger, that will be worse to remember
than my harsh words!  won't you come here again?  do!'

heathcliff went to the back of her chair, and leant over, but not so far
as to let her see his face, which was livid with emotion.  she bent round
to look
 
 ___________________________
 
 at him; he would not permit it: turning abruptly, he walked to
the fireplace, where he stood, silent, with his back towards us.  mrs.
linton's glance followed him suspiciously: every movement woke a new
sentiment in her.  after a pause and a prolonged gaze, she resumed;
addressing me in accents of indignant disappointment:--

'oh, you see, nelly, he would not relent a moment to keep me out of the
grave.  _that_ is how i'm loved!  well, never mind.  that is not _my_
heathcliff.  i shall love mine yet; and take him with me: he's in my
soul.  and,' added she musingly, 'the thing that irks me most is this
shattered prison, after all.  i'm tired of being enclosed here.  i'm
wearying to escape into that glorious world, and to be always there: not
seeing it dimly through tears, and yearning for it through the walls of
an aching heart: but really with it, and in it.  nelly, you think you are
better and more fortunate than i; in full health and strength: you are
sorry for me
 
 ___________________________
 
--very soon that will be altered.  i shall be sorry for
_you_.  i shall be incomparably beyond and above you all.  i _wonder_ he
won't be near me!'  she went on to herself.  'i thought he wished it.
heathcliff, dear! you should not be sullen now.  do come to me,
heathcliff.'

in her eagerness she rose and supported herself on the arm of the chair.
at that earnest appeal he turned to her, looking absolutely desperate.
his eyes, wide and wet, at last flashed fiercely on her; his breast
heaved convulsively.  an instant they held asunder, and then how they met
i hardly saw, but catherine made a spring, and he caught her, and they
were locked in an embrace from which i thought my mistress would never be
released alive: in fact, to my eyes, she seemed directly insensib
 
 ___________________________
 
ne wrong,
i'm dying for it.  it is enough!  you left me too: but i won't upbraid
you!  i forgive you.  forgive me!'

'it is hard to forgive, and to look at those eyes, and feel those wasted
hands,' he answered.  'kiss me again; and don't let me see your eyes!  i
forgive what you have done to me.  i love _my_ murderer--but _yours_!  how
can i?'

they were silent--their faces hid against each other, and washed by each
other's tears.  at least, i suppose the weeping was on both sides; as it
seemed heathcliff could weep on a great occasion like this.

i grew very uncomfortable, meanwhile; for the afternoon wore fast away,
the man whom i had sent off returned from his errand, and i could
distinguish, by the shine of the western sun up the valley, a concourse
thickening outside gimmerton chapel porch.

'service is over,' i announced.  'my master will be here in half an
hour.'

heathcliff groaned a curse, and strained catherine closer: she never
moved.

ere long i perceived a group of the servants pass
 
 ___________________________
 
ing up the road towards
the kitchen wing.  mr. linton was not far behind; he opened the gate
himself and sauntered slowly up, probably enjoying the lovely afternoon
that breathed as soft as summer.

'now he is here,' i exclaimed.  'for heaven's sake, hurry down!  you'll
not meet any one on the front stairs.  do be quick; and stay among the
trees till he is fairly in.'

'i must go, cathy,' said heathcliff, seeking to extricate himself from
his companion's arms.  'but if i live, i'll see you again before you are
asleep.  i won't stray five yards from your window.'

'you must not go!' she answered, holding him as firmly as her strength
allowed.  'you _shall_ not, i tell you.'

'for one hour,' he pleaded earnestly.

'not for one minute,' she replied.

'i _must_--linton will be up immediately,' persisted the alarmed
intruder.

he would have risen, and unfixed her fingers by the act--she clung fast,

 
 ___________________________
 
gasping: there was mad resolution in her face.

'no!' she shrieked.  'oh, don't, don't go.  it is the last time!  edgar
will not hurt us.  heathcliff, i shall die!  i shall die!'

'damn the fool!  there he is,' cried heathcliff, sinking back into his
seat.  'hush, my darling!  hush, hush, catherine!  i'll stay.  if he shot
me so, i'd expire with a blessing on my lips.'

and there they were fast again.  i heard my master mounting the
stairs--the cold sweat ran from my forehead: i was horrified.

'are you going to listen to her ravings?' i said, passionately.  'she
does not know what she says.  will you ruin her, because she has not wit
to help herself?  get up!  you could be free instantly.  that is the most
diabolical
 
 ___________________________
 
rrow.  i shall be
under those larch-trees.  mind! or i pay another visit, whether linton be
in or not.'

he sent a rapid glance through the half-open door of the chamber, and,
ascertaining that what i stated was apparently true, delivered the house
of his luckless presence.




chapter xvi


about twelve o'clock that night was born the catherine you saw at
wuthering heights: a puny, seven-months' child; and two hours after the
mother died, having never recovered sufficient consciousness to miss
heathcliff, or know edgar.  the latter's distraction at his bereavement
is a subject too painful to be dwelt on; its after-effects showed how
deep the sorrow sunk.  a great addition, in my eyes, was his being left
without an heir.  i bemoaned that, as i gazed on the feeble orphan; and i
mentally abused old linton for (what was only natural partiality) the
securing his estate to his own daughter, instead of his son's.  an
unwelcomed infant it was, poor thing!  it might have wailed out of life,
and nobody c
 
 ___________________________
 
r?  i'd give a
great deal to know.

i declined answering mrs. dean's question, which struck me as something
heterodox.  she proceeded:

retracing the course of catherine linton, i fear we have no right to
think she is; but we'll leave her with her maker.

the master looked asleep, and i ventured soon after sunrise to quit the
room and steal out to the pure refreshing air.  the servants thought me
gone to shake off the drowsiness of my protracted watch; in reality, my
chief motive was seeing mr. heathcliff.  if he had remained among the
larches all night, he would have heard nothing of the stir at the grange;
unless, perhaps, he might catch the gallop of the messenger going to
gimmerton.  if he had come nearer, he would probably be aware, from the
lights flitting to and fro, and the opening and shutting of the outer
doors, that all was not right within.  i wished, yet feared, to find him.
i felt the terrible news must be told, and i longed to get it over; but
how to do it i did not know.  he was 
 
 ___________________________
 
ither for themselves or others.  when i first
looked into his face, i perceived that he had got intelligence of the
catastrophe; and a foolish notion struck me that his heart was quelled
and he prayed, because his lips moved and his gaze was bent on the
ground.

'yes, she's dead!' i answered, checking my sobs and drying my cheeks.
'gone to heaven, i hope; where we may, every one, join her, if we take
due warning and leave our evil ways to follow good!'

'did _she_ take due warning, then?' asked heathcliff, attempting a sneer.
'did she die like a saint?  come, give me a true history of the event.
how did--?'

he endeavoured to pronounce the name, but could not manage it; and
compressing his mouth he held a silent combat with his inward agony,
defying, meanwhile, my sympathy with an unflinching, ferocious stare.
'how did she die?' he resumed, at last--fain, notwithstanding his
hardihood, to have a support behind him; for, after the struggle, he
trembled, in spite of himself, to his very finger-end
 
 ___________________________
 
tant to
quit him so.  but the moment he recollected himself enough to notice me
watching, he thundered a command for me to go, and i obeyed.  he was
beyond my skill to quiet or console!

mrs. linton's funeral was appointed to take place on the friday following
her decease; and till then her coffin remained uncovered, and strewn with
flowers and scented leaves, in the great drawing-room.  linton spent his
days and nights there, a sleepless guardian; and--a circumstance
concealed from all but me--heathcliff spent his nights, at least,
outside, equally a stranger to repose.  i held no communication with him:
still, i was conscious of his design to enter, if he could; and on the
tuesday, a little after dark, when my master, from sheer fatigue, had
been compelled to retire a couple of hours, i went and opened one of the
windows; moved by his perseverance to give him a chance of bestowing on
the faded image of his idol one final adieu.  he did not omit to avail
himself of the opportunity, cautiously a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd briefly; too cautiously to
betray his presence by the slightest noise.  indeed, i shouldn't have
discovered that he had been there, except for the disarrangement of the
drapery about the corpse's face, and for observing on the floor a curl of
light hair, fastened with a silver thread; which, on examination, i
ascertained to have been taken from a locket hung round catherine's neck.
heathcliff had opened the trinket and cast out its contents, replacing
them by a black lock of his own.  i twisted the two, and enclosed them
together.

mr. earnshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains of his sister
to the grave; he sent no excuse, but he never came; so that, besides her
husband, the mourners were wholly composed of tenants and servants.
isabella was not asked.

the place of catherine's interment, to the surprise of the villagers, was
neither in the chapel under the carved monum
 
 ___________________________
 
ame forward to the fire, panting and holding her
hand to her side.

'i have run the whole way from wuthering heights!' she continued, after a
pause; 'except where i've flown.  i couldn't count the number of falls
i've had.  oh, i'm aching all over!  don't be alarmed!  there shall be an
explanation as soon as i can give it; only just have the goodness to step
out and order the carriage to take me on to gimmerton, and tell a servant
to seek up a few clothes in my wardrobe.'

the intruder was mrs. heathcliff.  she certainly seemed in no laughing
predicament: her hair streamed on her shoulders, dripping with snow and
water; she was dressed in the girlish dress she commonly wore, befitting
her age more than her position: a low frock with short sleeves, and
nothing on either head or neck.  the frock was of light silk, and clung
to her with wet, and her feet were protected merely by thin slippers; add
to this a deep cut under one ear, which only the cold prevented from
bleeding profusely, a white face 
 
 ___________________________
 
ke my instinct of self-preservation, so i fairly broke free;
and if ever i come into his hands again he is welcome to a signal
revenge.

'yesterday, you know, mr. earnshaw should have been at the funeral.  he
kept himself sober for the purpose--tolerably sober: not going to bed mad
at six o'clock and getting up drunk at twelve.  consequently, he rose, in
suicidal low spirits, as fit for the church as for a dance; and instead,
he sat down by the fire and swallowed gin or brandy by tumblerfuls.

'heathcliff--i shudder to name him! has been a stranger in the house from
last sunday till to-day.  whether the angels have fed him, or his kin
beneath, i cannot tell; but he has not eaten a meal with us for nearly a
week.  he has just come home at dawn, and gone up-stairs to his chamber;
locking himself in--as if anybody dreamt of coveting his company!  there
he has continued, praying like a methodist: only the deity he implored is
senseless dust and ashes; and god, when addressed, was curiously
confounde
 
 ___________________________
 
arding this season of deliverance from degrading
oppression as a holiday.

'i recovered spirits sufficient to bear joseph's eternal lectures without
weeping, and to move up and down the house less with the foot of a
frightened thief than formerly.  you wouldn't think that i should cry at
anything joseph could say; but he and hareton are detestable companions.
i'd rather sit with hindley, and hear his awful talk, than with "t'
little maister" and his staunch supporter, that odious old man!  when
heathcliff is in, i'm often obliged to seek the kitchen and their
society, or starve among the damp uninhabited chambers; when he is not,
as was the case this week, i establish a table and chair at one corner of
the house fire, and never mind how mr. earnshaw may occupy himself; and
he does not interfere with my arrangements.  he is quieter now than he
used to be, if no one provokes him: more sullen and depressed, and less
furious.  joseph affirms he's sure he's an altered man: that the lord has
touched h
 
 ___________________________
 
or three hours.  there was no sound
through the house but the moaning wind, which shook the windows every now
and then, the faint crackling of the coals, and the click of my snuffers
as i removed at intervals the long wick of the candle.  hareton and
joseph were probably fast asleep in bed.  it was very, very sad: and
while i read i sighed, for it seemed as if all joy had vanished from the
world, never to be restored.

'the doleful silence was broken at length by the sound of the kitchen
latch: heathcliff had returned from his watch earlier than usual; owing,
i suppose, to the sudden storm.  that entrance was fastened, and we heard
him coming round to get in by the other.  i rose with an irrepressible
expression of what i felt on my lips, which induced my companion, who had
been staring towards the door, to turn and look at me.

'"i'll keep him out five minutes," he exclaimed.  "you won't object?"

'"no, you may keep him out the whole night for me," i answered.  "do! put
the key in the lock, and
 
 ___________________________
 
we were neither of us cowards, we might combine to
discharge it.  are you as soft as your brother?  are you willing to
endure to the last, and not once attempt a repayment?"

'"i'm weary of enduring now," i replied; "and i'd be glad of a
retaliation that wouldn't recoil on myself; but treachery and violence
are spears pointed at both ends; they wound those who resort to them
worse than their enemies."

'"treachery and violence are a just return for treachery and violence!"
cried hindley.  "mrs. heathcliff, i'll ask you to do nothing; but sit
still and be dumb.  tell me now, can you?  i'm sure you would have as
much pleasure as i in witnessing the conclusion of the fiend's existence;
he'll be _your_ death unless you overreach him; and he'll be _my_ ruin.
damn the hellish villain!  he knocks at the door as if he were master
here already!  promise to hold your tongue, and before that clock
strikes--it wants three minutes of one--you're a free woman!"

'he took the implements which i described to yo
 
 ___________________________
 
ain.  "come in and get
shot, if you please.  i've done my duty."

'with that i shut the window and returned to my place by the fire; having
too small a stock of hypocrisy at my command to pretend any anxiety for
the danger that menaced him.  earnshaw swore passionately at me:
affirming that i loved the villain yet; and calling me all sorts of names
for the base spirit i evinced.  and i, in my secret heart (and conscience
never reproached me), thought what a blessing it would be for _him_
should heathcliff put him out of misery; and what a blessing for _me_
should he send heathcliff to his right abode!  as i sat nursing these
reflections, the casement behind me was banged on to the floor by a blow
from the latter individual, and his black countenance looked blightingly
through.  the stanchions stood too close to suffer his shoulders to
follow, and i smiled, exulting in my fancied security.  his hair and
clothes were whitened with snow, and his sharp cannibal teeth, revealed
by cold and wrath, gle
 
 ___________________________
 
rough the dark.

'"isabella, let me in, or i'll make you repent!" he "girned," as joseph
calls it.

'"i cannot commit murder," i replied.  "mr. hindley stands sentinel with
a knife and loaded pistol."

'"let me in by the kitchen door," he said.

'"hindley will be there before me," i answered: "and that's a poor love
of yours that cannot bear a shower of snow!  we were left at peace in our
beds as long as the summer moon shone, but the moment a blast of winter
returns, you must run for shelter!  heathcliff, if i were you, i'd go
stretch myself over her grave and die like a faithful dog.  the world is
surely not worth living in now, is it?  you had distinctly impressed on
me the idea that catherine was the whole joy of your life: i can't
imagine how you think of surviving her loss."

'"he's there, is he?" exclaimed my companion, rushing to the gap.  "if i
can get my arm out i can hit him!"

'i'm afraid, ellen, you'll set me down as really wicked; but you don't
know all, so don't judge.  i wouldn't
 
 ___________________________
 
 have aided or abetted an attempt on
even _his_ life for anything.  wish that he were dead, i must; and
therefore i was fearfully disappointed, and unnerved by terror for the
consequences of my taunting speech, when he flung himself on earnshaw's
weapon and wrenched it from his grasp.

'the charge exploded, and the knife, in springing back, closed into its
owner's wrist.  heathcliff pulled it away by main force, slitting up the
flesh as it passed on, and thrust it dripping into his pocket.  he then
took a stone, struck down the division between two windows, and sprang
in.  his adversary had fallen senseless with excessive pain and the flow
of blood, that gushed from an artery or a large vein.  the ruffian kicked
and trampled on him, and dashed his head repeatedly against the flags,
holding me with one hand, meantime, to prevent me summoning joseph.  he
exerted preterhuman 
 
 ___________________________
 
 apparently inanimate body on to the settle.  there he tore off the
sleeve of earnshaw's coat, and bound up the wound with brutal roughness;
spitting and cursing during the operation as energetically as he had
kicked before.  being at liberty, i lost no time in seeking the old
servant; who, having gathered by degrees the purport of my hasty tale,
hurried below, gasping, as he descended the steps two at once.

'"what is ther to do, now? what is ther to do, now?"

'"there's this to do," thundered heathcliff, "that your master's mad; and
should he last another month, i'll have him to an asylum.  and how the
devil did you come to fasten me out, you toothless hound?  don't stand
muttering and mumbling there.  come, i'm not going to nurse him.  wash
that stuff away; and mind the sparks of your candle--it is more than half
brandy!"

'"and so ye've been murthering on him?" exclaimed joseph, lifting his
hands and eyes in horror.  "if iver i seed a seeght loike this!  may the
lord--"

'heathcliff gave him
 
 ___________________________
 
 foot of the gallows.

'"oh, i forgot you," said the tyrant.  "you shall do that.  down with
you.  and you conspire with him against me, do you, viper?  there, that
is work fit for you!"

'he shook me till my teeth rattled, and pitched me beside joseph, who
steadily concluded his supplications, and then rose, vowing he would set
off for the grange directly.  mr. linton was a magistrate, and though he
had fifty wives dead, he should inquire into this.  he was so obstinate
in his resolution, that heathcliff deemed it expedient to compel from my
lips a recapitulation of what had taken place; standing over me, heaving
with malevolence, as i reluctantly delivered the account in answer to his
questions.  it required a great deal of labour to satisfy the old man
that heathcliff was not the aggressor; especially with my hardly-wrung
replies.  however, mr. earnshaw soon convinced him that he was alive
still; joseph hastened to administer a dose of spirits, and by their
succour his master presently regain
 
 ___________________________
 
ed motion and consciousness.
heathcliff, aware that his opponent was ignorant of the treatment
received while insensible, called him deliriously intoxicated; and said
he should not notice his atrocious conduct further, but advised him to
get to bed.  to my joy, he left us, after giving this judicious counsel,
and hindley stretched himself on the hearthstone.  i departed to my own
room, marvelling that i had escaped so easily.

'this morning, when i came down, about half an hour before noon, mr.
earnshaw was sitting by the fire, deadl
 
 ___________________________
 
ainst the chimney.  neither appeared inclined
to dine, and, having waited till all was cold on the table, i commenced
alone.  nothing hindered me from eating heartily, and i experienced a
certain sense of satisfaction and superiority, as, at intervals, i cast a
look towards my silent companions, and felt the comfort of a quiet
conscience within me.  after i had done, i ventured on the unusual
liberty of drawing near the fire, going round earnshaw's seat, and
kneeling in the corner beside him.

'heathcliff did not glance my way, and i gazed up, and contemplated his
features almost as confidently as if they had been turned to stone.  his
forehead, that i once thought so manly, and that i now think so
diabolical, was shaded with a heavy cloud; his basilisk eyes were nearly
quenched by sleeplessness, and weeping, perhaps, for the lashes were wet
then: his lips devoid of their ferocious sneer, and sealed in an
expression of unspeakable sadness.  had it been another, i would have
covered my face in th
 
 ___________________________
 
gnoble as it seems to insult a fallen enemy, i couldn't
miss this chance of sticking in a dart: his weakness was the only time
when i could taste the delight of paying wrong for wrong.'

'fie, fie, miss!' i interrupted.  'one might suppose you had never opened
a bible in your life.  if god afflict your enemies, surely that ought to
suffice you.  it is both mean and presumptuous to add your torture to
his!'

'in general i'll allow that it would be, ellen,' she continued; 'but what
misery laid on heathcliff could content me, unless i have a hand in it?
i'd rather he suffered less, if i might cause his sufferings and he might
_know_ that i was the cause.  oh, i owe him so much.  on only one
condition can i hope to forgive him.  it is, if i may take an eye for an
eye, a tooth for a tooth; for every wrench of agony return a wrench:
reduce him to my level.  as he was the first to injure, make him the
first to implore pardon; and then--why then, ellen, i might show you some
generosity.  but it is utter
 
 ___________________________
 
ing around him:
the longer he stood, the plainer his reflections revealed their blackness
through his features.

'"oh, if god would but give me strength to strangle him in my last agony,
i'd go to hell with joy," groaned the impatient man, writhing to rise,
and sinking back in despair, convinced of his inadequacy for the
struggle.

'"nay, it's enough that he has murdered one of you," i observed aloud.
"at the grange, every one knows your sister would have been living now
had it not been for mr. heathcliff.  after all, it is preferable to be
hated than loved by him.  when i recollect how happy we were--how happy
catherine was before he came--i'm fit to curse the day."

'most likely, heathcliff noticed more the truth of what was said, than
the spirit of the person who said it.  his attention was roused, i saw,
for his eyes rained down tears among the ashes, and he drew his breath in
suffocating sighs.  i stared full at him, and laughed scornfully.  the
clouded windows of hell flashed a moment towa
 
 ___________________________
 
r
brother requires attendance, which, for her sake, i shall supply.  now,
that she's dead, i see her in hindley: hindley has exactly her eyes, if
you had not tried to gouge them out, and made them black and red; and
her--"

'"get up, wretched idiot, before i stamp you to death!" he cried, making
a movement that caused me to make one also.

'"but then," i continued, holding myself ready to flee, "if poor
catherine had trusted you, and assumed the ridiculous, contemptible,
degrading title of mrs. heathcliff, she would soon have presented a
similar picture!  _she_ wouldn't have borne your abominable behaviour
quietly: her detestation and disgust must have found voice."

'the back of the settle and earnshaw's person interposed between me and
him; so instead of endeavouring to reach me, he snatched a dinner-knife
from the table and flung it at my head.  it struck beneath my ear, and
stopped the sentence i was uttering; but, pulling it out, i sprang to the
door and delivered another; which i hope went
 
 ___________________________
 
 on me, and descended to the carriage, accompanied by
fanny, who yelped wild with joy at recovering her mistress.  she was
driven away, never to revisit this neighbourhood: but a regular
correspondence was established between her and my master when things were
more settled.  i believe her new abode was in the south, near london;
there she had a son born a few months subsequent to her escape.  he was
christened linton, and, from the first, she reported him to be an ailing,
peevish creature.

mr. heathcliff, meeting me one day in the village, inquired where she
lived.  i refused to tell.  he remarked that it was not of any moment,
only she must beware of coming to her brother: she should not be with
him, if he had to keep her himself.  though i would give no information,
he discovered, through some of the other servants, both her place of
residence and the existence of the child.  still, he didn't molest her:
for which forbearance she might thank his aversion, i suppose.  he often
asked about the 
 
 ___________________________
 
ton was twelve, or a little more.

on the day succeeding isabella's unexpected visit i had no opportunity of
speaking to my master: he shunned conversation, and was fit for
discussing nothing.  when i could get him to listen, i saw it pleased him
that his sister had left her husband; whom he abhorred with an intensity
which the mildness of his nature would scarcely seem to allow.  so deep
and sensitive was his aversion, that he refrained from going anywhere
where he was likely to see or hear of heathcliff.  grief, and that
together, transformed him into a complete hermit: he threw up his office
of magistrate, ceased even to attend church, avoided the village on all
occasions, and spent a life of entire seclusion within the limits of his
park and grounds; only varied by solitary rambles on the moors, and
visits to the grave of his wife, mostly at evening, or early morning
before other wanderers were abroad.  but he was too good to be thoroughly
unhappy long.  _he_ didn't pray for catherine's soul
 
 ___________________________
 
and hopeful aspiring to the
better world; where he doubted not she was gone.

and he had earthly consolation and affections also.  for a few days, i
said, he seemed regardless of the puny successor to the departed: that
coldness melted as fast as snow in april, and ere the tiny thing could
stammer a word or totter a step it wielded a despot's sceptre in his
heart.  it was named catherine; but he never called it the name in full,
as he had never called the first catherine short: probably because
heathcliff had a habit of doing so.  the little one was always cathy: it
formed to him a distinction from the mother, and yet a connection with
her; and his attachment sprang from its relation to her, far more than
from its being his own.

i used to draw a comparison between him and hindley earnshaw, and perplex
myself to explain satisfactorily why their conduct was so opposite in
similar circumstances.  they had both been fond husbands, and were both
attached to their children; and i could not see how th
 
 ___________________________
 
tions for the funeral.  mr. kenneth came to announce the event to
my master.

'well, nelly,' said he, riding into the yard one morning, too early not
to alarm me with an instant presentiment of bad news, 'it's yours and my
turn to go into mourning at present.  who's given us the slip now, do you
think?'

'who?' i asked in a flurry.

'why, guess!' he returned, dismounting, and slinging his bridle on a hook
by the door.  'and nip up the corner of your apron: i'm certain you'll
need it.'

'not mr. heathcliff, surely?' i exclaimed.

'what! would you have tears for him?' said the doctor.  'no, heathcliff's
a tough young fellow: he looks blooming to-day.  i've just seen him.  he's
rapidly regaining flesh since he lost his better half.'

'who is it, then, mr. kenneth?' i repeated impatiently.

'hindley earnshaw!  your old friend hindley,' he replied, 'and my wicked
gossip: though he's been too wild for me this long while.  there!  i said
we should draw water.  but cheer up!  he died true to his charact
 
 ___________________________
 
  besides, i reminded him that the child
hareton was his wife's nephew, and, in the absence of nearer kin, he
ought to act as its guardian; and he ought to and must inquire how the
property was left, and look over the concerns of his brother-in-law.  he
was unfit for attending to such matters then, but he bid me speak to his
lawyer; and at length permitted me to go.  his lawyer had been earnshaw's
also: i called at the village, and asked him to accompany me.  he shook
his head, and advised that heathcliff should be let alone; affirming, if
the truth were known, hareton would be found little else than a beggar.

'his father died in debt,' he said; 'the whole property is mortgaged, and
the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow him an opportunity of
creating some interest in the creditor's heart, that he may be inclined
to deal leniently towards him.'

when i reached the heights, i explained that i had come to see everything
carried on decently; and joseph, who appeared in sufficient distres
 
 ___________________________
 
s,
expressed satisfaction at my presence.  mr. heathcliff said he did not
perceive that i was wanted; but i might stay and order the arrangements
for the funeral, if i chose.

'correctly,' he remarked, 'that fool's body should be buried at the
cross-roads, without ceremony of any kind. i happened to leave him ten
minutes yesterday afternoon, and in that interval he fastened the two
doors of the house against me, and he has spent the night in drinking
himself to death deliberately! we broke in this morning, for we heard
him sporting like a horse; and t
 
 ___________________________
 
ettle:
flaying and scalping would not have wakened him. i sent for kenneth, and
he came; but not till the beast had changed into carrion: he was both
dead and cold, and stark; and so you'll allow it was useless making more
stir about him!'

the old servant confirmed this statement, but muttered:

'i'd rayther he'd goan hisseln for t' doctor!  i sud ha' taen tent o' t'
maister better nor him--and he warn't deead when i left, naught o' t'
soart!'

i insisted on the funeral being respectable.  mr. heathcliff said i might
have my own way there too: only, he desired me to remember that the money
for the whole affair came out of his pocket.  he maintained a hard,
careless deportment, indicative of neither joy nor sorrow: if anything,
it expressed a flinty gratification at a piece of difficult work
successfully executed.  i observed once, indeed, something like
exultation in his aspect: it was just when the people were bearing the
coffin from the house.  he had the hypocrisy to represent a mourner: and
 
 ___________________________
 

previous to following with hareton, he lifted the unfortunate child on to
the table and muttered, with peculiar gusto, 'now, my bonny lad, you are
_mine_!  and we'll see if one tree won't grow as crooked as another, with
the same wind to twist it!'  the unsuspecting thing was pleased at this
speech: he played with heathcliff's whiskers, and stroked his cheek; but
i divined its meaning, and observed tartly, 'that boy must go back with
me to thrushcross grange, sir.  there is nothing in the world less yours
than he is!'

'does linton say so?' he demanded.

'of course--he has ordered me to take him,' i replied.

'well,' said the scoundrel, 'we'll not argue the subject now: but i have
a fancy to try my hand at rearing a young one; so intimate to your master
that i must supply the place of this with my own, if he attemp
 
 ___________________________
 
nt was enough to bind our hands.  i repeated its substance on my
return; and edgar linton, little interested at the commencement, spoke no
more of interfering.  i'm not aware that he could have done it to any
purpose, had he been ever so willing.

the guest was now the master of wuthering heights: he held firm
possession, and proved to the attorney--who, in his turn, proved it to
mr. linton--that earnshaw had mortgaged every yard of land he owned for
cash to supply his mania for gaming; and he, heathcliff, was the
mortgagee.  in that manner hareton, who should now be the first gentleman
in the neighbourhood, was reduced to a state of complete dependence on
his father's inveterate enemy; and lives in his own house as a servant,
deprived of the advantage of wages: quite unable to right himself,
because of his friendlessness, and his ignorance that he has been
wronged.




chapter xviii


the twelve years, continued mrs. dean, following that dismal period were
the happiest of my life: my greatest t
 
 ___________________________
 
ately, curiosity and a quick
intellect made her an apt scholar: she learned rapidly and eagerly, and
did honour to his teaching.

till she reached the age of thirteen she had not once been beyond the
range of the park by herself.  mr. linton would take her with him a mile
or so outside, on rare occasions; but he trusted her to no one else.
gimmerton was an unsubstantial name in her ears; the chapel, the only
building she had approached or entered, except her own home.  wuthering
heights and mr. heathcliff did not exist for her: she was a perfect
recluse; and, apparently, perfectly contented.  sometimes, indeed, while
surveying the country from her nursery window, she would observe--

'ellen, how long will it be before i can walk to the top of those hills?
i wonder what lies on the other side--is it the sea?'

'no, miss cathy,' i would answer; 'it is hills again, just like these.'

'and what are those golden rocks like when you stand under them?' she
once asked.

the abrupt descent of penistone c
 
 ___________________________
 
aids mentioning the fairy cave, quite turned her head with a
desire to fulfil this project: she teased mr. linton about it; and he
promised she should have the journey when she got older.  but miss
catherine measured her age by months, and, 'now, am i old enough to go to
penistone crags?' was the constant question in her mouth.  the road
thither wound close by wuthering heights.  edgar had not the heart to
pass it; so she received as constantly the answer, 'not yet, love: not
yet.'

i said mrs. heathcliff lived above a dozen years after quitting her
husband.  her family were of a delicate constitution: she and edgar both
lacked the ruddy health that you will generally meet in these parts.  what
her last illness was, i am not certain: i conjecture, they died of the
same thing, a kind of fever, slow at its commencement, but incurable, and
rapidly consuming life towards the close.  she wrote to inform her
brother of the probable conclusion of a four-months' indisposition under
which she had suffere
 
 ___________________________
 
the hedge yonder, where it
is lowest, and galloped out of sight.'

you may guess how i felt at hearing this news.  it struck me directly she
must have started for penistone crags.  'what will become of her?' i
ejaculated, pushing through a gap which the man was repairing, and making
straight to the high-road.  i walked as if for a wager, mile after mile,
till a turn brought me in view of the heights; but no catherine could i
detect, far or near.  the crags lie about a mile and a half beyond mr.
heathcliff's place, and that is four from the grange, so i began to fear
night would fall ere i could reach them.  'and what if she should have
slipped in clambering among them,' i reflected, 'and been killed, or
broken some of her bones?'  my suspense was truly painful; and, at first,
it gave me delightful relief to observe, in hurrying by the farmhouse,
charlie, the fiercest of the pointers, lying under a window, with swelled
head and bleeding ear.  i opened the wicket and ran to the door, knocking
vehe
 
 ___________________________
 
hispered; 'people can have many cousins and of all
sorts, miss cathy, without being any the worse for it; only they needn't
keep their company, if they be disagreeable and bad.'

'he's not--he's not my cousin, ellen!' she went on, gathering fresh grief
from reflection, and flinging herself into my arms for refuge from the
idea.

i was much vexed at her and the servant for their mutual revelations;
having no doubt of linton's approaching arrival, communicated by the
former, being reported to mr. heathcliff; and feeling as confident that
catherine's first thought on her father's return would be to seek an
explanation of the latter's assertion concerning her rude-bred kindred.
hareton, recovering from his disgust at being taken for a servant, seemed
moved by her distress; and, having fetched the pony round to the door, he
took, to propitiate her, a fine crooked-legged terrier whelp from the
kennel, and putting it into her hand, bid her whist! for he meant nought.
pausing in her lamentations, she su
 
 ___________________________
 
 healthy, but attired in garments befitting his daily
occupations of working on the farm and lounging among the moors after
rabbits and game.  still, i thought i could detect in his physiognomy a
mind owning better qualities than his father ever possessed.  good things
lost amid a wilderness of weeds, to be sure, whose rankness far
over-topped their neglected growth; yet, notwithstanding, evidence of a
wealthy soil, that might yield luxuriant crops under other and favourable
circumstances.  mr. heathcliff, i believe, had not treated him physically
ill; thanks to his fearless nature, which offered no temptation to that
course of oppression: he had none of the timid susceptibility that would
have given zest to ill-treatment, in heathcliff's judgment.  he appeared
to have bent his malevolence on making him a brute: he was never taught
to read or write; never rebuked for any bad habit which did not annoy his
keeper; never led a single step towards virtue, or guarded by a single
precept against vice.
 
 ___________________________
 
  and from what i heard, joseph contributed much to
his deterioration, by a narrow-minded partiality which prompted him to
flatter and pet him, as a boy, because he was the head of the old family.
and as he had been in the habit of accusing catherine earnshaw and
heathcliff, when children, of putting the master past his patience, and
compelling him to seek solace in drink by what he termed their 'offald
ways,' so at present he laid the whole burden of hareton's faults on the
shoulders of the usurper of his property.  if the lad swore, he wouldn't
correct him: nor however culpably he behaved.  it gave joseph
satisfaction, apparently, to watch him go the worst lengths: he allowed
that the lad was ruined: that his soul was abandoned to perdition; but
then he reflecte
 
 ___________________________
 
d that heathcliff must answer for it.  hareton's blood
would be required at his hands; and there lay immense consolation in that
thought.  joseph had instilled into him a pride of name, and of his
lineage; he would, had he dared, have fostered hate between him and the
present owner of the heights: but his dread of that owner amounted to
superstition; and he confined his feelings regarding him to muttered
innuendoes and private comminations.  i don't pretend to be intimately
acquainted with the mode of living cus
 
 ___________________________
 
tomary in those days at wuthering
heights: i only speak from hearsay; for i saw little.  the villagers
affirmed mr. heathcliff was _near_, and a cruel hard landlord to his
tenants; but the house, inside, had regained its ancient aspect of
comfort under female management, and the scenes of riot common in
hindley's time were not now enacted within its walls.  the master was too
gloomy to seek companionship with any people, good or bad; and he is yet.

this, however, is not making progress with my story.  miss cathy rejected
the peace-offering of the terrier, and demanded her own dogs, charlie and
phoenix.  they came limp
 
 ___________________________
 
their owners could separate them: that formed
an introduction.  catherine told hareton who she was, and where she was
going; and asked him to show her the way: finally, beguiling him to
accompany her.  he opened the mysteries of the fairy cave, and twenty
other queer places.  but, being in disgrace, i was not favoured with a
description of the interesting objects she saw.  i could gather, however,
that her guide had been a favourite till she hurt his feelings by
addressing him as a servant; and heathcliff's housekeeper hurt hers by
calling him her cousin.  then the language he had held to her rankled in
her heart; she who was always 'love,' and 'darling,' and 'queen,' and
'angel,' with everybody at the grange, to be insulted so shockingly by a
stranger!  she did not comprehend it; and hard work i had to obtain a
promise that she would not lay the grievance before her father.  i
explained how he objected to the whole household at the heights, and how
sorry he would be to find she had been there; 
 
 ___________________________
 
l that weakling live at wuthering heights?  between his father
and hareton, what playmates and instructors they'll be.  our doubts were
presently decided--even earlier than i expected.  i had just taken the
children up-stairs, after tea was finished, and seen linton asleep--he
would not suffer me to leave him till that was the case--i had come down,
and was standing by the table in the hall, lighting a bedroom candle for
mr. edgar, when a maid stepped out of the kitchen and informed me that
mr. heathcliff's servant joseph was at the door, and wished to speak with
the master.

'i shall ask him what he wants first,' i said, in considerable
trepidation.  'a very unlikely hour to be troubling people, and the
instant they have returned from a long journey.  i don't think the master
can see him.'

joseph had advanced through the kitchen as i uttered these words, and now
presented himself in the hall.  he was donned in his sunday garments,
with his most sanctimonious and sourest face, and, holding his 
 
 ___________________________
 
uld have pitied the child on his own account;
but, recalling isabella's hopes and fears, and anxious wishes for her
son, and her commendations of him to his care, he grieved bitterly at the
prospect of yielding him up, and searched in his heart how it might be
avoided.  no plan offered itself: the very exhibition of any desire to
keep him would have rendered the claimant more peremptory: there was
nothing left but to resign him.  however, he was not going to rouse him
from his sleep.

'tell mr. heathcliff,' he answered calmly, 'that his son shall come to
wuthering heights to-morrow.  he is in bed, and too tired to go the
distance now.  you may also tell him that the mother of linton desired
him to remain under my guardianship; and, at present, his health is very
precarious.'

'noa!' said joseph, giving a thud with his prop on the floor, and
assuming an authoritative air.  'noa! that means naught.  hathecliff maks
noa 'count o' t' mother, nor ye norther; but he'll heu' his lad; und i
mun tak' him
 
 ___________________________
 
 cannot
associate with him hereafter, and it is better for her to remain in
ignorance of his proximity; lest she should be restless, and anxious to
visit the heights.  merely tell her his father sent for him suddenly, and
he has been obliged to leave us.'

linton was very reluctant to be roused from his bed at five o'clock, and
astonished to be informed that he must prepare for further travelling;
but i softened off the matter by stating that he was going to spend some
time with his father, mr. heathcliff, who wished to see him so much, he
did not like to defer the pleasure till he should recover from his late
journey.

'my father!' he cried, in strange perplexity.  'mamma never told me i had
a father.  where does he live?  i'd rather stay with uncle.'

'he lives a little distance from the grange,' i replied; 'just beyond
those hills: not so far, but you may walk over here when you get hearty.
and you should be glad to go home, and to see him.  you must try to love
him, as you did your mother, a
 
 ___________________________
 
--his mother's eyes, save that, unless a morbid touchiness
kindled them a moment, they had not a vestige of her sparkling spirit.

'how strange that he should never come to see mamma and me!' he murmured.
'has he ever seen me?  if he has, i must have been a baby.  i remember
not a single thing about him!'

'why, master linton,' said i, 'three hundred miles is a great distance;
and ten years seem very different in length to a grown-up person compared
with what they do to you.  it is probable mr. heathcliff proposed going
from summer to summer, but never found a convenient opportunity; and now
it is too late.  don't trouble him with questions on the subject: it will
disturb him, for no good.'

the boy was fully occupied with his own cogitations for the remainder of
the ride, till we halted before the farmhouse garden-gate.  i watched to
catch his impressions in his countenance.  he surveyed the carved front
and low-browed lattices, the straggling gooseberry-bushes and crooked
firs, with solemn int
 
 ___________________________
 
ness, and then shook his head: his private
feelings entirely disapproved of the exterior of his new abode.  but he
had sense to postpone complaining: there might be compensation within.
before he dismounted, i went and opened the door.  it was half-past six;
the family had just finished breakfast: the servant was clearing and
wiping down the table.  joseph stood by his master's chair telling some
tale concerning a lame horse; and hareton was preparing for the hayfield.

'hallo, nelly!' said mr. heathcliff, when he saw me.  'i feared i should
have to come down and fetch my property myself.  you've brought it, have
you?  let us see what we can make of it.'

he got up and strode to the door: hareton and joseph followed in gaping
curiosity.  poor linton ran a frightened eye over the faces of the three.

'sure-ly,' said joseph after a grave inspection, 'he's swopped wi' ye,
maister, an' yon's his lass!'

heathcliff, having stared his son into an ague of confusion, uttered a
scornful laugh.

'god! wha
 
 ___________________________
 
t a lovely, charming thing!' he exclaimed.
'hav'n't they reared it on snails and sour milk, nelly?  oh, damn my
soul! but that's worse than i expected--and the devil knows i was not
sanguine!'

i bid the trembling and bewildered child get down, and enter.  he did not
thoroughly comprehend the meaning of his father's speech, or whether it
were intended for him: indeed, he was not yet certain that the grim,
sneering stranger was his father.  but he clung to me with growing
trepidation; and on mr. heathcliff's taking a seat and bidding him 'come
hither' he hid his face on my shoulder and wept.

'tut, tut!' said heathcliff, stretching out a hand and dragging him
roughly between his knees, and then holding up his head by the chin.
'none of that nonsense!  we're not going to hurt thee, linton--isn't that
thy name?  thou art thy mother's child, entirely!  where is my share in
thee, puling chicken?'

he took off the boy's cap and pushed back his thick flaxen curls, felt
his slender arms and his small fi
 
 ___________________________
 
ngers; during which examination linton
ceased crying, and lifted his great blue eyes to inspect the inspector.

'do you know me?' asked heathcliff, having satisfied himself that the
limbs were all equally frail and feeble.

'no,' said linton, with a gaze of vacant fear.

'you've heard of me, i daresay?'

'no,' he replied again.

'no!  what a shame of your mother, never to waken your filial regard for
me!  you are my son, then, i'll tell you; and your mother was a wicked
slut to leave you in ignorance of the sort of father you possessed.  now,
don't wince, and colour up!  though it is something to see you have not
white blood.  be a good l
 
 ___________________________
 
ad; and i'll do for you.  nelly, if you be tired
you may sit down; if not, get home again.  i guess you'll report what you
hear and see to the cipher at the grange; and this thing won't be settled
while you linger about it.'

'well,' replied i, 'i hope you'll be kind to the boy, mr. heathcliff, or
you'll not keep him long; and he's all you have akin in the wide world,
that you will ever know--remember.'

'i'll be very kind to him, you needn't fear,' he said, laughing.  'only
nobody else must be kind to him: i'm jealous of monopolising his
affection.  and, to begin my kindness, joseph, bring the lad some
breakfast.  hareton, you infernal calf, begone to your work.  yes, nell,'
he added, when they had departed, 'my son is prospective owner of your
place, and i should not wish him to di
 
 ___________________________
 
ble: if i wished any blessing in the world, it was to find him a
worthy object of pride; and i'm bitterly disappointed with the
whey-faced, whining wretch!'

while he was speaking, joseph returned bearing a basin of milk-porridge,
and placed it before linton: who stirred round the homely mess with a
look of aversion, and affirmed he could not eat it. i saw the old
man-servant shared largely in his master's scorn of the child; though he
was compelled to retain the sentiment in his heart, because heathcliff
plainly meant his underlings to hold him in honour.

'cannot ate it?' repeated he, peering in linton's face, and subduing his
voice to a whisper, for fear of being overheard.  'but maister hareton
nivir ate naught else, when he wer a little 'un; and what wer gooid
enough for him's gooid enough for ye, i's rayther think!'

'i _sha'n't_ eat it!' answered linton, snappishly.  'take it away.'

joseph snatched up the food indignantly, and brought it to us.

'is there aught ails th' victuals?' he ask
 
 ___________________________
 
ed, thrusting the tray under
heathcliff's nose.

'what should ail them?' he said.

'wah!' answered joseph, 'yon dainty chap says he cannut ate 'em.  but i
guess it's raight!  his mother wer just soa--we wer a'most too mucky to
sow t' corn for makking her breead.'

'don't mention his mother to me,' said the master, angrily.  'get him
something that he can eat, that's all.  what is his usual food, nelly?'

i suggested boiled milk or tea; and the housekeeper received instructions
to prepare some.  come, i reflected, his father's selfish
 
 ___________________________
 
ness may
contribute to his comfort.  he perceives his delicate constitution, and
the necessity of treating him tolerably.  i'll console mr. edgar by
acquainting him with the turn heathcliff's humour has taken.  having no
excuse for lingering longer, i slipped out, while linton was engaged in
timidly rebuffing the advances of a friendly sheep-dog.  but he was too
much on the alert to be cheated: as i closed the door, i heard a cry, and
a frantic repetition of the words--

'don't leave me!  i'll not stay here!  i'll not stay here!'

then the latch was raised and fell: they did not suffer him to come
forth.  i mounted minny, and urged her to a trot; and so my brief
guardianship ended
 
 ___________________________
 
t intervals she inquired of
her father when linton would return, before she did see him again his
features had waxed so dim in her memory that she did not recognise him.

when i chanced to encounter the housekeeper of wuthering heights, in
paying business visits to gimmerton, i used to ask how the young master
got on; for he lived almost as secluded as catherine herself, and was
never to be seen.  i could gather from her that he continued in weak
health, and was a tiresome inmate.  she said mr. heathcliff seemed to
dislike him ever longer and worse, though he took some trouble to conceal
it: he had an antipathy to the sound of his voice, and could not do at
all with his sitting in the same room with him many minutes together.
there seldom passed much talk between them: linton learnt his lessons and
spent his evenings in a small apartment they called the parlour: or else
lay in bed all day: for he was constantly getting coughs, and colds, and
aches, and pains of some sort.

'and i never know such
 
 ___________________________
 
re sure to part, one swearing and the other
crying. i believe the master would relish earnshaw's thrashing him to a
mummy, if he were not his son; and i'm certain he would be fit to turn
him out of doors, if he knew half the nursing he gives hisseln. but then
he won't go into danger of temptation: he never enters the parlour, and
should linton show those ways in the house where he is, he sends him
up-stairs directly.'

i divined, from this account, that utter lack of sympathy had rendered
young heathcliff selfish and disagreeable, if he were not so originally;
and my interest in him, consequently, decayed: though still i was moved
with a sense of grief at his lot, and a wish that he had been left with
us.  mr. edgar encouraged me to gain information: he thought a great deal
about him, i fancy, and would have run some risk to see him; and he told
me once to ask the housekeeper whether he ever came into the village?  she
said he had only been twice, on horseback, accompanying his father; and
both 
 
 ___________________________
 
llocks and banks to climb and pass, that, at
length, i began to be weary, and told her we must halt, and retrace our
steps.  i shouted to her, as she had outstripped me a long way; she
either did not hear or did not regard, for she still sprang on, and i was
compelled to follow.  finally, she dived into a hollow; and before i came
in sight of her again, she was two miles nearer wuthering heights than
her own home; and i beheld a couple of persons arrest her, one of whom i
felt convinced was mr. heathcliff himself.

cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering, or, at least, hunting
out the nests of the grouse.  the heights were heathcliff's land, and he
was reproving the poacher.

'i've neither taken any nor found any,' she said, as i toiled to them,
expanding her hands in corroboration of the statement.  'i didn't mean to
take them; but papa told me there were quantities up here, and i wished
to see the eggs.'

heathcliff glanced at me with an ill-meaning smile, expressing his
acquaintance w
 
 ___________________________
 
d, then?' he said,
sarcastically.

'and what are you?' inquired catherine, gazing curiously on the speaker.
'that man i've seen before.  is he your son?'

she pointed to hareton, the other individual, who had gained nothing but
increased bulk and strength by the addition of two years to his age: he
seemed as awkward and rough as ever.

'miss cathy,' i interrupted, 'it will be three hours instead of one that
we are out, presently.  we really must go back.'

'no, that man is not my son,' answered heathcliff, pushing me aside.  'but
i have one, and you have seen him before too; and, though your nurse is
in a hurry, i think both you and she would be the better for a little
rest.  will you just turn this nab of heath, and walk into my house?
you'll get home earlier for the ease; and you shall receive a kind
welcome.'

i whispered catherine that she mustn't, on any account, accede to the
proposal: it was entirely out of the question.

'why?' she asked, aloud.  'i'm tired of running, and the ground is 
 
 ___________________________
 
d in coming from penistone crags.  don't you?'

'i do.  come, nelly, hold your tongue--it will be a treat for her to look
in on us.  hareton, get forwards with the lass.  you shall walk with me,
nelly.'

'no, she's not going to any such place,' i cried, struggling to release
my arm, which he had seized: but she was almost at the door-stones
already, scampering round the brow at full speed.  her appointed
companion did not pretend to escort her: he shied off by the road-side,
and vanished.

'mr. heathcliff, it's very wrong,' i continued: 'you know you mean no
good.  and there she'll see linton, and all will be told as soon as ever
we return; and i shall have the blame.'

'i want her to see linton,' he answered; 'he's looking better these few
days; it's not often he's fit to be seen.  and we'll soon persuade her to
keep the visit secret: where is the harm of it?'

'the harm of it is, that her father would hate me if he found i suffered
her to enter your house; and i am convinced you have a bad des
 
 ___________________________
 
es she'll be provided for at
once as joint successor with linton.'

'if linton died,' i answered, 'and his life is quite uncertain, catherine
would be the heir.'

'no, she would not,' he said.  'there is no clause in the will to secure
it so: his property would go to me; but, to prevent disputes, i desire
their union, and am resolved to bring it about.'

'and i'm resolved she shall never approach your house with me again,' i
returned, as we reached the gate, where miss cathy waited our coming.

heathcliff bade me be quiet; and, preceding us up the path, hastened to
open the door.  my young lady gave him several looks, as if she could not
exactly make up her mind what to think of him; but now he smiled when he
met her eye, and softened his voice in addressing her; and i was foolish
enough to imagine the memory of her mother might disarm him from desiring
her injury.  linton stood on the hearth.  he had been out walking in the
fields, for his cap was on, and he was calling to joseph to bring him d
 
 ___________________________
 
ry
shoes.  he had grown tall of his age, still wanting some months of
sixteen.  his features were pretty yet, and his eye and complexion
brighter than i remembered them, though with merely temporary lustre
borrowed from the salubrious air and genial sun.

'now, who is that?' asked mr. heathcliff, turning to cathy.  'can you
tell?'

'your son?' she said, having doubtfully surveyed, first one and then the
other.

'yes, yes,' answered he: 'but is this the only time you have beheld him?
think!  ah! you have a short memory.  linton, don't you recall your
cousin, that you used to tease us so with wishing to see?'

'what, linton!' cried cathy, kindling into joyful surprise at the name.
'is that little linton?  he's taller than i am!  are you linton?'

the youth stepped forward, and acknowledg
 
 ___________________________
 
ntly, and they gazed with wonder at the change time had wrought in
the appearance of each.  catherine had reached her full height; her
figure was both plump and slender, elastic as steel, and her whole aspect
sparkling with health and spirits.  linton's looks and movements were
very languid, and his form extremely slight; but there was a grace in his
manner that mitigated these defects, and rendered him not unpleasing.
after exchanging numerous marks of fondness with him, his cousin went to
mr. heathcliff, who lingered by the door, dividing his attention between
the objects inside and those that lay without: pretending, that is, to
observe the latter, and really noting the former alone.

'and you are my uncle, then!' she cried, reaching up to salute him.  'i
thought i liked you, though you were cross at first.  why don't you visit
at the grange with linton?  to live all these years such close
neighbours, and never see us, is odd: what have you done so for?'

'i visited it once or twice too often
 
 ___________________________
 
w i think of it,
i'd better tell you.  mr. linton has a prejudice against me: we
quarrelled at one time of our lives, with unchristian ferocity; and, if
you mention coming here to him, he'll put a veto on your visits
altogether.  therefore, you must not mention it, unless you be careless
of seeing your cousin hereafter: you may come, if you will, but you must
not mention it.'

'why did you quarrel?' asked catherine, considerably crestfallen.

'he thought me too poor to wed his sister,' answered heathcliff, 'and was
grieved that i got her: his pride was hurt, and he'll never forgive it.'

'that's wrong!' said the young lady: 'some time i'll tell him so.  but
linton and i have no share in your quarrel.  i'll not come here, then; he
shall come to the grange.'

'it will be too far for me,' murmured her cousin: 'to walk four miles
would kill me.  no, come here, miss catherine, now and then: not every
morning, but once or twice a week.'

the father launched towards his son a glance of bitter contempt.
 
 ___________________________
 
linton!'

'yes, father,' answered the boy.

'have you nothing to show your cousin anywhere about, not even a rabbit
or a weasel's nest?  take her into the garden, before you change your
shoes; and into the stable to see your horse.'

'wouldn't you rather sit here?' asked linton, addressing cathy in a tone
which expressed reluctance to move again.

'i don't know,' she replied, casting a longing look to the door, and
evidently eager to be active.

he kept his seat, and shrank closer to the fire.  heathcliff rose, and
went into the kitchen, and from thence to the yard, calling out for
hareton.  hareton responded, and presently the two re-entered.  the young
man had been washing himself, as was visible by the glow on his cheeks
and his wetted hair.

'oh, i'll ask _you_, uncle,' cried miss cathy, recollecting the
housekeeper's assertion.  'that is not my cousin, is he?'

'yes,' he, replied, 'your mother's nephew.  don't you like him!'

catherine looked queer.

'is he not a handsome lad?' he continued
 
 ___________________________
 
.

the uncivil little thing stood on tiptoe, and whispered a sentence in
heathcliff's ear.  he laughed; hareton darkened: i perceived he was very
sensitive to suspected slights, and had obviously a dim notion of his
inferiority.  but his master or guardian chased the frown by exclaiming--

'you'll be the favourite among us, hareton!  she says you are a--what was
it?  well, something very flattering.  here! you go with her round the
farm.  and behave like a gentleman, mind!  don't use any bad words; and
don't stare when the young lady is not looking at you, and be ready to
hide
 
 ___________________________
 
f, and entertain her as
nicely as you can.'

he watched the couple walking past the window.  earnshaw had his
countenance completely averted from his companion.  he seemed studying
the familiar landscape with a stranger's and an artist's interest.
catherine took a sly look at him, expressing small admiration.  she then
turned her attention to seeking out objects of amusement for herself, and
tripped merrily on, lilting a tune to supply the lack of conversation.

'i've tied his tongue,' observed heathcliff.  'he'll not venture a single
syllable all the time!  nelly, you recollect me at his age--nay, some
years younger.  did i ever look so stupid: so "gaumless," as joseph calls
it?'

'worse,' i replied, 'because more sullen with it.'

'i've a pleasure in him,' he continued, reflecting aloud. 'he has
satisfied my expectations. if he were a born fool i should not enjoy it
half so much. but he's no fool; and i can sympathise with all his
feelings, having felt them myself. i know what he suffers now, 
 
 ___________________________
 
o. _his_ had
first-rate qualities, and they are lost: rendered worse than unavailing.
i have nothing to regret; he would have more than any but i are aware
of. and the best of it is, hareton is damnably fond of me! you'll own
that i've outmatched hindley there. if the dead villain could rise from
his grave to abuse me for his offspring's wrongs, i should have the fun
of seeing the said offspring fight him back again, indignant that he
should dare to rail at the one friend he has in the world!'

heathcliff chuckled a fiendish laugh at the idea.  i made no reply,
because i saw that he expected none.  meantime, our young companion, who
sat too removed from us to hear what was said, began to evince symptoms
of uneasiness, probably repenting that he had denied himself the treat of
catherine's society for fear of a little fatigue.  his father remarked
the restless glances wandering to the window, and the hand irresolutely
extended towards his cap.

'get up, you idle boy!' he exclaimed, with assumed he
 
 ___________________________
 
o matter of
amusement.

'where is the use of the devil in that sentence?' tittered linton.  'papa
told you not to say any bad words, and you can't open your mouth without
one.  do try to behave like a gentleman, now do!'

'if thou weren't more a lass than a lad, i'd fell thee this minute, i
would; pitiful lath of a crater!' retorted the angry boor, retreating,
while his face burnt with mingled rage and mortification! for he was
conscious of being insulted, and embarrassed how to resent it.

mr. heathcliff having overheard the conversation, as well as i, smiled
when he saw him go; but immediately afterwards cast a look of singular
aversion on the flippant pair, who remained chattering in the door-way:
the boy finding animation enough while discussing hareton's faults and
deficiencies, and relating anecdotes of his goings on; and the girl
relishing his pert and spiteful sayings, without considering the
ill-nature they evinced.  i began to dislike, more than to compassionate
linton, and to excuse h
 
 ___________________________
 
yet pretended to
pity me so, when i kept hoping, and was always disappointed about
linton's coming back!'

she gave a faithful account of her excursion and its consequences; and my
master, though he cast more than one reproachful look at me, said nothing
till she had concluded.  then he drew her to him, and asked if she knew
why he had concealed linton's near neighbourhood from her?  could she
think it was to deny her a pleasure that she might harmlessly enjoy?

'it was because you disliked mr. heathcliff,' she answered.

'then you believe i care more for my own feelings than yours, cathy?' he
said.  'no, it was not because i disliked mr. heathcliff, but because mr.
heathcliff dislikes me; and is a most diabolical man, delighting to wrong
and ruin those he hates, if they give him the slightest opportunity.  i
knew that you could not keep up an acquaintance with your cousin without
being brought into contact with him; and i knew he would detest you on my
account; so for your own good, and nothing
 
 ___________________________
 
 else, i took precautions that
you should not see linton again.  i meant to explain this some time as
you grew older, and i'm sorry i delayed it.'

'but mr. heathcliff was quite cordial, papa,' observed catherine, not at
all convinced; 'and he didn't object to our seeing each other: he said i
might come to his house when i pleased; only i must not tell you, because
you had quarrelled with him, and would not forgive him for marrying aunt
isabella.  and you won't.  _you_ are the one to be blamed: he is willing
to let us be friends, at least; linton and i; and you are not.'

my master, perceiving that she would not take his word for her
uncle-in-law's evil dispo
 
 ___________________________
 
sition, gave a hasty sketch of his conduct to
isabella, and the manner in which wuthering heights became his property.
he could not bear to discourse long upon the topic; for though he spoke
little of it, he still felt the same horror and detestation of his
ancient enemy that had occupied his heart ever since mrs. linton's
death. 'she might have been living yet, if it had not been for him!' was
his constant bitter reflection; and, in his eyes, heathcliff seemed a
murderer. miss cathy--conversant with no bad deeds except her own slight
acts of disobedience, injustice, and passion, arising from hot temper
and thoughtlessness, and repented of on the day they were committed--was
amazed at the blackness of spirit that could brood on and cover revenge
for years, and deliberately prosecute its plans without a visitation of
remorse. she appeared so deeply impressed and shocked at this new view
of human nature--excluded from all her studies and all her 
 
 ___________________________
 
 suspicions were roused; i determined to
take a peep at her mysterious treasures; so, at night, as soon as she and
my master were safe upstairs, i searched, and readily found among my
house keys one that would fit the lock.  having opened, i emptied the
whole contents into my apron, and took them with me to examine at leisure
in my own chamber.  though i could not but suspect, i was still surprised
to discover that they were a mass of correspondence--daily almost, it
must have been--from linton heathcliff: answers to documents forwarded by
her.  the earlier dated were embarrassed and short; gradually, however,
they expanded into copious love-letters, foolish, as the age of the
writer rendered natural, yet with touches here and there which i thought
were borrowed from a more experienced source.  some of them struck me as
singularly odd compounds of ardour and flatness; commencing in strong
feeling, and concluding in the affected, wordy style that a schoolboy
might use to a fancied, incorporeal sw
 
 ___________________________
 
was done; i stirred up the ashes, and interred
them under a shovelful of coals; and she mutely, and with a sense of
intense injury, retired to her private apartment.  i descended to tell my
master that the young lady's qualm of sickness was almost gone, but i
judged it best for her to lie down a while.  she wouldn't dine; but she
reappeared at tea, pale, and red about the eyes, and marvellously subdued
in outward aspect.  next morning i answered the letter by a slip of
paper, inscribed, 'master heathcliff is requested to send no more notes
to miss linton, as she will not receive them.'  and, henceforth, the
little boy came with vacant pockets.




chapter xxii


summer drew to an end, and early autumn: it was past michaelmas, but the
harvest was late that year, and a few of our fields were still uncleared.
mr. linton and his daughter would frequently walk out among the reapers;
at the carrying of the last sheaves they stayed till dusk, and the
evening happening to be chill and damp, my master ca
 
 ___________________________
 
e would do; so, repeating my desire that she would remain
there, i was about to hurry home as fast as i could, when an approaching
sound arrested me.  it was the trot of a horse; cathy's dance stopped
also.

'who is that?' i whispered.

'ellen, i wish you could open the door,' whispered back my companion,
anxiously.

'ho, miss linton!' cried a deep voice (the rider's), 'i'm glad to meet
you.  don't be in haste to enter, for i have an explanation to ask and
obtain.'

'i sha'n't speak to you, mr. heathcliff,' answered catherine.  'papa says
you are a wicked man, and you hate both him and me; and ellen says the
same.'

'that is nothing to the purpose,' said heathcliff.  (he it was.)  'i
don't hate my son, i suppose; and it is concerning him that i demand your
attention.  yes; you have cause to blush.  two or three months since,
were you not in the habit of writing to linton? making love in play, eh?
you deserved, both of you, flogging for that!  you especially, the elder;
and less sensitive, as it 
 
 ___________________________
 
l be from home all this week; go and see if have not
spoken truth: do, there's a darling! just imagine your father in my
place, and linton in yours; then think how you would value your careless
lover if he refused to stir a step to comfort you, when your father
himself entreated him; and don't, from pure stupidity, fall into the
same error. i swear, on my salvation, he's going to his grave, and none
but you can save him!'

the lock gave way and i issued out.

'i swear linton is dying,' repeated heathcliff, looking hard at me.  'and
grief and disappointment are hastening his death.  nelly, if you won't
let her go, you can walk over yourself.  but i shall not return till this
time next week; and i think your master himself would scarcely object to
her visiting her cousin.'

'come in,' said i, taking cathy by the arm and half forcing her to
re-enter; for she lingered, viewing with troubled eyes the features of
the speaker, too stern to express his inward deceit.

he pushed his horse close, and, ben
 
 ___________________________
 
icine.  don't mind mrs. dean's cruel cautions; but be generous, and
contrive to see him.  he dreams of you day and night, and cannot be
persuaded that you don't hate him, since you neither write nor call.'

i closed the door, and rolled a stone to assist the loosened lock in
holding it; and spreading my umbrella, i drew my charge underneath: for
the rain began to drive through the moaning branches of the trees, and
warned us to avoid delay.  our hurry prevented any comment on the
encounter with heathcliff, as we stretched towards home; but i divined
instinctively that catherine's heart was clouded now in double darkness.
her features were so sad, they did not seem hers: she evidently regarded
what she had heard as every syllable true.

the master had retired to rest before we came in.  cathy stole to his
room to inquire how he was; he had fallen asleep.  she returned, and
asked me to sit with her in the library.  we took our tea together; and
afterwards she lay down on the rug, and told me not t
 
 ___________________________
 
o talk, for she was
weary.  i got a book, and pretended to read.  as soon as she supposed me
absorbed in my occupation, she recommenced her silent weeping: it
appeared, at present, her favourite diversion.  i suffered her to enjoy
it a while; then i expostulated: deriding and ridiculing all mr.
heathcliff's assertions about his son, as if i were certain she would
coincide.  alas!  i hadn't skill to counteract the effect his account had
produced: it was just what he intended.

'you may be right, ellen,' she answered; 'but i shall never feel at ease
till i know.  and i must tell linton it is not my fault that i don't
write, and convince him that i shall not change.'

what use were anger and protestations against her silly credulity?  we
parted that night--hostile; but next day beheld me on the roa
 
 ___________________________
 
es: and i yielded, in the faint hope that linton
himself might prove, by his reception of us, how little of the tale was
founded on fact.




chapter xxiii


the rainy night had ushered in a misty morning--half frost, half
drizzle--and temporary brooks crossed our path--gurgling from the
uplands.  my feet were thoroughly wetted; i was cross and low; exactly
the humour suited for making the most of these disagreeable things.  we
entered the farm-house by the kitchen way, to ascertain whether mr.
heathcliff were really absent: because i put slight faith in his own
affirmation.

joseph seemed sitting in a sort of elysium alone, beside a roaring fire;
a quart of ale on the table near him, bristling with large pieces of
toasted oat-cake; and his black, short pipe in his mouth.  catherine ran
to the hearth to warm herself.  i asked if the master was in?  my
question remained so long unanswered, that i thought the old man had
grown deaf, and repeated it louder.

'na--ay!' he snarled, or rather screamed
 
 ___________________________
 

else.  i wonder where zillah is!  will you' (looking at me) 'step into
the kitchen and see?'

i had received no thanks for my other service; and being unwilling to run
to and fro at his behest, i replied--'nobody is out there but joseph.'

'i want to drink,' he exclaimed fretfully, turning away.  'zillah is
constantly gadding off to gimmerton since papa went: it's miserable!  and
i'm obliged to come down here--they resolved never to hear me up-stairs.'

'is your father attentive to you, master heathcliff?' i asked, perceiving
catherine to be checked in her friendly advances.

'attentive?  he makes them a little more attentive at least,' he cried.
'the wretches!  do you know, miss linton, that brute hareton laughs at
me!  i hate him! indeed, i hate them all: they are odious beings.'

cathy began searching for some water; she lighted on a pitcher in the
dresser, filled a tumbler, and brought it.  he bid her add a spoonful of
wine from a bottle on the table; and having swallowed a small portion,
a
 
 ___________________________
 
 he replied.
'but i have been vexed, because you wouldn't come.  and papa swore it was
owing to me: he called me a pitiful, shuffling, worthless thing; and said
you despised me; and if he had been in my place, he would be more the
master of the grange than your father by this time.  but you don't
despise me, do you, miss--?'

'i wish you would say catherine, or cathy,' interrupted my young lady.
'despise you?  no!  next to papa and ellen, i love you better than
anybody living.  i don't love mr. heathcliff, though; and i dare not come
when he returns: will he stay away many days?'

'not many,' answered linton; 'but he goes on to the moors frequently,
since the shooting season commenced; and you might spend an hour or two
with me in his absence.  do say you will.  i think i should not be
peevish with you: you'd not provoke me, and you'd always be ready to help
me, wouldn't you?'

'yes,' said catherine, stroking his long soft hair: 'if i could only get
papa's consent, i'd spend half my time with yo
 
 ___________________________
 
uld never love anybody better than papa,' she returned gravely.
'and people hate their wives, sometimes; but not their sisters and
brothers: and if you were the latter, you would live with us, and papa
would be as fond of you as he is of me.'

linton denied that people ever hated their wives; but cathy affirmed they
did, and, in her wisdom, instanced his own father's aversion to her aunt.
i endeavoured to stop her thoughtless tongue.  i couldn't succeed till
everything she knew was out.  master heathcliff, much irritated, asserted
her relation was false.

'papa told me; and papa does not tell falsehoods,' she answered pertly.

'_my_ papa scorns yours!' cried linton.  'he calls him a sneaking fool.'

'yours is a wicked man,' retorted catherine; 'and you are very naughty to
dare to repeat what he says.  he must be wicked to have made aunt
isabella leave him as she did.'

'she didn't leave him,' said the boy; 'you sha'n't contradict me.'

'she did,' cried my young lady.

'well, i'll tell you someth
 
 ___________________________
 
ing!' said linton.  'your mother hated your
father: now then.'

'oh!' exclaimed catherine, too enraged to continue.

'and she loved mine,' added he.

'you little liar!  i hate you now!' she panted, and her face grew red
with passion.

'she did! she did!' sang linton, sinking into the recess of his chair,
and leaning back his head to enjoy the agitation of the other disputant,
who stood behind.

'hush, master heathcliff!' i said; 'that's your father's tale, too, i
suppose.'

'it isn't: you hold your tongue!' he answered.  'she did, she did,
catherine! she did, she did!'

cathy, beside herself, gave the chair a violent push, and caused him to
fall against one arm.  he was immediately seized by a suffocating cough
that soon ended his triumph.  it lasted so long that it frightened even
me.  as to his cousin, she wept with all her might, aghast at the
mischief she had done: though she said nothing.  i held him til
 
 ___________________________
 
l the fit
exhausted itself.  then he thrust me away, and leant his head down
silently.  catherine quelled her lamentations also, took a seat opposite,
and looked solemnly into the fire.

'how do you feel now, master heathcliff?' i inquired, after waiting ten
minutes.

'i wish _she_ felt as i do,' he replied: 'spiteful, cruel thing! hareton
never touches me: he never struck me in his life. and i was better
to-day: and there--' his voice died in a whimper.

'_i_ didn't strike you!' muttered cathy, chewing her lip to prevent
another burst of emotion.

he sighed and moaned like one under great suffering, and kept it up for a
quarter of an hour; on purpose to distress his cousin apparently, for
whenever he caught a stifle
 
 ___________________________
 
ossed uneasily on the former, as if it were a
stone or a block of wood.  she tried to put it more comfortably.

'i can't do with that,' he said; 'it's not high enough.'

catherine brought another to lay above it.

'that's too high,' murmured the provoking thing.

'how must i arrange it, then?' she asked despairingly.

he twined himself up to her, as she half knelt by the settle, and
converted her shoulder into a support.

'no, that won't do,' i said.  'you'll be content with the cushion, master
heathcliff.  miss has wasted too much time on you already: we cannot
remain five minutes longer.'

'yes, yes, we can!' replied cathy.  'he's good and patient now.  he's
beginning to think i shall have far greater misery than he will to-night,
if i believe he is the worse for my visit: and then i dare not come
again.  tell the truth about it, linton; for i musn't come, if i have
hurt you.'

'you must come, to cure me,' he answered.  'you ought to come, because
you have hurt me: you know you have extremely!
 
 ___________________________
 
 may say a nice long interesting ballad--one of those
you promised to teach me; or a story.  i'd rather have a ballad, though:
begin.'

catherine repeated the longest she could remember.  the employment
pleased both mightily.  linton would have another, and after that
another, notwithstanding my strenuous objections; and so they went on
until the clock struck twelve, and we heard hareton in the court,
returning for his dinner.

'and to-morrow, catherine, will you be here to-morrow?' asked young
heathcliff, holding her frock as she rose reluctantly.

'no,' i answered, 'nor next day neither.'  she, however, gave a different
response evidently, for his forehead cleared as she stooped and whispered
in his ear.

'you won't go to-morrow, recollect, miss!' i commenced, when we were out
of the house.  'you are not dreaming of it, are you?'

she smiled.

'oh, i'll take good care,' i continued: 'i'll have that lock mended, and
you can escape by no way else.'

'i can get over the wall,' she said laughing. 
 
 ___________________________
 
on would recover quickly if
he had me to look after him.  i'm older than he is, you know, and wiser:
less childish, am i not?  and he'll soon do as i direct him, with some
slight coaxing.  he's a pretty little darling when he's good.  i'd make
such a pet of him, if he were mine.  we should never quarrel, should we
after we were used to each other?  don't you like him, ellen?'

'like him!' i exclaimed.  'the worst-tempered bit of a sickly slip that
ever struggled into its teens.  happily, as mr. heathcliff conjectured,
he'll not win twenty.  i doubt whether he'll see spring, indeed.  and
small loss to his family whenever he drops off.  and lucky it is for us
that his father took him: the kinder he was treated, the more tedious and
selfish he'd be.  i'm glad you have no chance of having him for a
husband, miss catherine.'

my companion waxed serious at hearing this speech.  to speak of his death
so regardlessly wounded her feelings.

'he's younger than i,' she answered, after a protracted pause of
 
 ___________________________
 
y in, if we
removed the table; and i asked linton to call zillah in to help us, and
we'd have a game at blindman's-buff; she should try to catch us: you used
to, you know, ellen.  he wouldn't: there was no pleasure in it, he said;
but he consented to play at ball with me.  we found two in a cupboard,
among a heap of old toys, tops, and hoops, and battledores and
shuttlecocks.  one was marked c., and the other h.; i wished to have the
c., because that stood for catherine, and the h. might be for heathcliff,
his name; but the bran came out of h., and linton didn't like it.  i beat
him constantly: and he got cross again, and coughed, and returned to his
chair.  that night, though, he easily recovered his good humour: he was
charmed with two or three pretty songs--_your_ songs, ellen; and when i
was obliged to go, he begged and entreated me to come the following
evening; and i promised.  minny and i went flying home as light as air;
and i dreamt of wuthering heights and my sweet, darling cousin, til
 
 ___________________________
 
for i came to see linton, not him.  he
reddened--i saw that by the moonlight--dropped his hand from the latch,
and skulked off, a picture of mortified vanity.  he imagined himself to
be as accomplished as linton, i suppose, because he could spell his own
name; and was marvellously discomfited that i didn't think the same.'

'stop, miss catherine, dear!'--i interrupted.  'i shall not scold, but i
don't like your conduct there.  if you had remembered that hareton was
your cousin as much as master heathcliff, you would have felt how
improper it was to behave in that way.  at least, it was praiseworthy
ambition for him to desire to be as accomplished as linton; and probably
he did not learn merely to show off: you had made him ashamed of his
ignorance before, i have no doubt; and he wished to remedy it and please
you.  to sneer at his imperfect attempt was very bad breeding.  had you
been brought up in his circumstances, would you be less rude?  he was as
quick and as intelligent a child as ever you
 
 ___________________________
 
 were; and i'm hurt that he
should be despised now, because that base heathcliff has treated him so
unjustly.'

'well, ellen, you won't cry about it, will you?' she exclaimed, surprised
at my earnestness.  'but wait, and you shall hear if he conned his a b c
to please me; and if it were worth while being civil to the brute.  i
entered; linton was lying on the settle, and half got up to welcome me.

'"i'm ill to-night, catherine, love," he said; "and you must have all the
talk, and let me listen.  come, and sit by me.  i was sure you wouldn't
break your word, and i'll make y
 
 ___________________________
 
 use trying to conceal my presence.

'"young master is in the house," said zillah, as she saw me making for
the parlour.  i went in; earnshaw was there also, but he quitted the room
directly.  linton sat in the great arm-chair half asleep; walking up to
the fire, i began in a serious tone, partly meaning it to be true--

'"as you don't like me, linton, and as you think i come on purpose to
hurt you, and pretend that i do so every time, this is our last meeting:
let us say good-bye; and tell mr. heathcliff that you have no wish to see
me, and that he mustn't invent any more falsehoods on the subject."

'"sit down and take your hat off, catherine," he answered.  "you are so
much happier than i am, you ought to be better.  papa talks enough of my
defects, and shows enough scorn of me, to make it natural i should doubt
myself.  i doubt whether i am not altogether as worthless as he calls me,
frequently; and then i feel so cross and bitter, i hate everybody!  i am
worthless, and bad in temper, and ba
 
 ___________________________
 
 that distorted nature.
he'll never let his friends be at ease, and he'll never be at ease
himself!  i have always gone to his little parlour, since that night;
because his father returned the day after.

'about three times, i think, we have been merry and hopeful, as we were
the first evening; the rest of my visits were dreary and troubled: now
with his selfishness and spite, and now with his sufferings: but i've
learned to endure the former with nearly as little resentment as the
latter.  mr. heathcliff purposely avoids me: i have hardly seen him at
all.  last sunday, indeed, coming earlier than usual, i heard him abusing
poor linton cruelly for his conduct of the night before.  i can't tell
how he knew of it, unless he listened.  linton had certainly behaved
provokingly: however, it was the business of nobody but me, and i
interrupted mr. heathcliff's lecture by entering and telling him so.  he
burst into a laugh, and went away, saying he was glad i took that view of
the matter.  since then, 
 
 ___________________________
 
, weeks, to be
carried up, and laid in its lonely hollow!  ellen, i've been very happy
with my little cathy: through winter nights and summer days she was a
living hope at my side.  but i've been as happy musing by myself among
those stones, under that old church: lying, through the long june
evenings, on the green mound of her mother's grave, and wishing--yearning
for the time when i might lie beneath it.  what can i do for cathy?  how
must i quit her?  i'd not care one moment for linton being heathcliff's
son; nor for his taking her from me, if he could console her for my loss.
i'd not care that heathcliff gained his ends, and triumphed in robbing me
of my last blessing!  but should linton be unworthy--only a feeble tool
to his father--i cannot abandon her to him!  and, hard though it be to
crush her buoyant spirit, i must persevere in making her sad while i
live, and leaving her solitary when i die.  darling!  i'd rather resign
her to god, and lay her in the earth before me.'

'resign her to 
 
 ___________________________
 
hed, and his eyes were bright; she felt sure of his recovering.
on her seventeenth birthday, he did not visit the churchyard: it was
raining, and i observed--'you'll surely not go out to-night, sir?'

he answered,--'no, i'll defer it this year a little longer.'  he wrote
again to linton, expressing his great desire to see him; and, had the
invalid been presentable, i've no doubt his father would have permitted
him to come.  as it was, being instructed, he returned an answer,
intimating that mr. heathcliff objected to his calling at the grange; but
his uncle's kind remembrance delighted him, and he hoped to meet him
sometimes in his rambles, and personally to petition that his cousin and
he might not remain long so utterly divided.

that part of his letter was simple, and probably his own.  heathcliff
knew he could plead eloquently for catherine's company, then.

'i do not ask,' he said, 'that she may visit here; but am i never to see
her, because my father forbids me to go to her home, and you f
 
 ___________________________
 
 on the moors
nearest the grange: for june found him still declining.  though he had
set aside yearly a portion of his income for my young lady's fortune, he
had a natural desire that she might retain--or at least return in a short
time to--the house of her ancestors; and he considered her only prospect
of doing that was by a union with his heir; he had no idea that the
latter was failing almost as fast as himself; nor had any one, i believe:
no doctor visited the heights, and no one saw master heathcliff to make
report of his condition among us.  i, for my part, began to fancy my
forebodings were false, and that he must be actually rallying, when he
mentioned riding and walking on the moors, and seemed so earnest in
pursuing his object.  i could not picture a father treating a dying child
as tyrannically and wickedly as i afterwards learned heathcliff had
treated him, to compel this apparent eagerness: his efforts redoubling
the more imminently his avaricious and unfeeling plans were threatened
 
 ___________________________
 
are off at
once.'

'well, we'll turn our horses' heads round when we reach him,' answered my
companion; 'our excursion shall lie towards home.'

but when we reached him, and that was scarcely a quarter of a mile from
his own door, we found he had no horse; and we were forced to dismount,
and leave ours to graze.  he lay on the heath, awaiting our approach, and
did not rise till we came within a few yards.  then he walked so feebly,
and looked so pale, that i immediately exclaimed,--'why, master
heathcliff, you are not fit for enjoying a ramble this morning.  how ill
you do look!'

catherine surveyed him with grief and astonishment: she changed the
ejaculation of joy on her lips to one of alarm; and the congratulation on
their long-postponed meeting to an anxious inquiry, whether he were worse
than usual?

'no--better--better!' he panted, trembling, and retaining her hand as if
he needed its support, while his large blue eyes wandered timidly over
her; the hollowness round them transforming to ha
 
 ___________________________
 
 give him my thanks for permitting you to come--my best
thanks, catherine.  and--and, if you _did_ meet my father, and he asked
you about me, don't lead him to suppose that i've been extremely silent
and stupid: don't look sad and downcast, as you are doing--he'll be
angry.'

'i care nothing for his anger,' exclaimed cathy, imagining she would be
its object.

'but i do,' said her cousin, shuddering.  '_don't_ provoke him against
me, catherine, for he is very hard.'

'is he severe to you, master heathcliff?' i inquired.  'has he grown
weary of indulgence, and passed from passive to active hatred?'

linton looked at me, but did not answer; and, after keeping her seat by
his side another ten minutes, during which his head fell drowsily on his
breast, and he uttered nothing except suppressed moans of exhaustion or
pain, cathy began to seek solace in looking for bilberries, and sharing
the produce of her researches with me: she did not offer them to him, for
she saw further notice would only weary an
 
 ___________________________
 
ting us
back.'

'well, we must not leave him asleep,' i answered; 'wait till he wakes,
and be patient.  you were mighty eager to set off, but your longing to
see poor linton has soon evaporated!'

'why did _he_ wish to see me?' returned catherine.  'in his crossest
humours, formerly, i liked him better than i do in his present curious
mood.  it's just as if it were a task he was compelled to perform--this
interview--for fear his father should scold him.  but i'm hardly going to
come to give mr. heathcliff pleasure; whatever reason he may have for
ordering linton to undergo this penance.  and, though i'm glad he's
better in health, i'm sorry he's so much less pleasant, and so much less
affectionate to me.'

'you think _he is_ better in health, then?' i said.

'yes,' she answered; 'because he always made such a great deal of his
sufferings, you know.  he is not tolerably well, as he told me to tell
papa; but he's better, very likely.'

'there you differ with me, miss cathy,' i remarked; 'i should 
 
 ___________________________
 
on, than when we
separated in winter?  if you be, i'm certain one thing is not
stronger--your regard for me: speak,--are you?'

the tears gushed from linton's eyes as he answered, 'yes, yes, i am!'
and, still under the spell of the imaginary voice, his gaze wandered up
and down to detect its owner.

cathy rose.  'for to-day we must part,' she said.  'and i won't conceal
that i have been sadly disappointed with our meeting; though i'll mention
it to nobody but you: not that i stand in awe of mr. heathcliff.'

'hush,' murmured linton; 'for god's sake, hush!  he's coming.'  and he
clung to catherine's arm, striving to detain her; but at that
announcement she hastily disengaged herself, and whistled to minny, who
obeyed her like a dog.

'i'll be here next thursday,' she cried, springing to the saddle.
'good-bye. quick, ellen!'

and so we left him, scarcely conscious of our departure, so absorbed was
he in anticipating his father's approach.

before we reached home, catherine's displeasure softened i
 
 ___________________________
 
sted longer, and the sunshine was more
transient; and her poor little heart reproached itself for even that
passing forgetfulness of its cares.

we discerned linton watching at the same spot he had selected before.  my
young mistress alighted, and told me that, as she was resolved to stay a
very little while, i had better hold the pony and remain on horseback;
but i dissented: i wouldn't risk losing sight of the charge committed to
me a minute; so we climbed the slope of heath together.  master
heathcliff received us with greater animation on this occasion: not the
animation of high spirits though, nor yet of joy; it looked more like
fear.

'it is late!' he said, speaking short and with difficulty.  'is not your
father very ill?  i thought you wouldn't come.'

'_why_ won't you be candid?' cried catherine, swallowing her greeting.
'why cannot you say at once you don't want me?  it is strange, linton,
that for the second time you have brought me here on purpose, apparently
to distress us both, and
 
 ___________________________
 
read him--i dread him!  i _dare_ not tell!'

'oh, well!' said catherine, with scornful compassion, 'keep your secret:
_i'm_ no coward.  save yourself: i'm not afraid!'

her magnanimity provoked his tears: he wept wildly, kissing her
supporting hands, and yet could not summon courage to speak out.  i was
cogitating what the mystery might be, and determined catherine should
never suffer to benefit him or any one else, by my good will; when,
hearing a rustle among the ling, i looked up and saw mr. heathcliff
almost close upon us, descending the heights.  he didn't cast a glance
towards my companions, though they were sufficiently near for linton's
sobs to be audible; but hailing me in the almost hearty tone he assumed
to none besides, and the sincerity of which i couldn't avoid doubting, he
said--

'it is something to see you so near to my house, nelly.  how are you at
the grange?  let us hear.  the rumour goes,' he added, in a lower tone,
'that edgar linton is on his death-bed: perhaps they exagge
 
 ___________________________
 
use
that lad yonder seems determined to beat me; and i'd thank his uncle to
be quick, and go before him!  hallo! has the whelp been playing that game
long?  i _did_ give him some lessons about snivelling.  is he pretty
lively with miss linton generally?'

'lively? no--he has shown the greatest distress,' i answered.  'to see
him, i should say, that instead of rambling with his sweetheart on the
hills, he ought to be in bed, under the hands of a doctor.'

'he shall be, in a day or two,' muttered heathcliff.  'but first--get up,
linton!  get up!' he shouted.  'don't grovel on the ground there up, this
moment!'

linton had sunk prostrate again in another paroxysm of helpless fear,
caused by his father's glance towards him, i suppose: there was nothing
else to produce such humiliation.  he made several efforts to obey, but
his little strength was annihilated for the time, and he fell back again
with a moan.  mr. heathcliff advanced, and lifted him to lean against a
ridge of turf.

'now,' said he, wi
 
 ___________________________
 
red catherine, 'i can't go to wuthering heights:
papa has forbidden me.  he'll not harm you: why are you so afraid?'

'i can never re-enter that house,' he answered.  'i'm _not_ to re-enter
it without you!'

'stop!' cried his father.  'we'll respect catherine's filial scruples.
nelly, take him in, and i'll follow your advice concerning the doctor,
without delay.'

'you'll do well,' replied i.  'but i must remain with my mistress: to
mind your son is not my business.'

'you are very stiff,' said heathcliff, 'i know that: but you'll force me
to pinch the baby and make it scream before it moves your charity.  come,
then, my hero.  are you willing to return, escorted by me?'

he approached once more, and made as if he would seize the fragile being;
but, shrinking back, linton clung to his cousin, and implored her to
accompany him, with a frantic importunity that admitted no denial.
however i disapproved, i couldn't hinder her: indeed, how could she have
refused him herself?  what was filling him wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h dread we had no means of
discerning; but there he was, powerless under its grip, and any addition
seemed capable of shocking him into idiotcy.  we reached the threshold;
catherine walked in, and i stood waiting till she had conducted the
invalid to a chair, expecting her out immediately; when mr. heathcliff,
pushing me forward, exclaimed--'my house is not stricken with the plague,
nelly; and i have a mind to be hospitable to-day: sit down, and allow me
to shut the door.'

he shut and locked it also.  i started.

'you shall have tea before you go home,' he added.  'i am by myself.
hareton is gone with some cattle to the lees, and zillah and joseph are
off on a journey of pleasure; and, though i'm used to being alone, i'd
rather have some interesting company, if i can get it.  miss linton, take
your
 
 ___________________________
 
where laws are less strict and
tastes less dainty, i should treat myself to a slow vivisection of those
two, as an evening's amusement.'

he drew in his breath, struck the table, and swore to himself, 'by hell!
i hate them.'

'i am not afraid of you!' exclaimed catherine, who could not hear the
latter part of his speech.  she stepped close up; her black eyes flashing
with passion and resolution.  'give me that key: i will have it!' she
said.  'i wouldn't eat or drink here, if i were starving.'

heathcliff had the key in his hand that remained on the table.  he looked
up, seized with a sort of surprise at her boldness; or, possibly,
reminded, by her voice and glance, of the person from whom she inherited
it.  she snatched at the instrument, and half succeeded in getting it out
of his loosened fingers: but her action recalled him to the present; he
recovered it speedily.

'now, catherine linton,' he said, 'stand off, or i shall knock you down;
and, that will make mrs. dean mad.'

regardless of thi
 
 ___________________________
 
s warning, she captured his closed hand and its contents
again.  'we _will_ go!' she repeated, exerting her utmost efforts to cause
the iron muscles to relax; and finding that her nails made no impression,
she applied her teeth pretty sharply.  heathcliff glanced at me a glance
that kept me from interfering a moment.  catherine was too intent on his
fingers to notice his face.  he opened them suddenly, and resigned the
object of dispute; but, ere she had well secured it, he seized her with
the liberated hand, and, pulling her on his knee, administered with the
other a shower of terrific slaps on both sides of the head, each
sufficient to have fulfilled his threat, had she been able to fall.

at this diabolical violence i rushed on him furiously.
 
 ___________________________
 
our father, to-morrow--all the father you'll have in a few days--and
you shall have plenty of that.  you can bear plenty; you're no weakling:
you shall have a daily taste, if i catch such a devil of a temper in your
eyes again!'

cathy ran to me instead of linton, and knelt down and put her burning
cheek on my lap, weeping aloud.  her cousin had shrunk into a corner of
the settle, as quiet as a mouse, congratulating himself, i dare say, that
the correction had alighted on another than him.  mr. heathcliff,
perceiving us all confounded, rose, and expeditiously made the tea
himself.  the cups and saucers were laid ready.  he poured it out, and
handed me a cup.

'wash away your spleen,' he said.  'and help your own naughty pet and
mine.  it is not poisoned, though i prepared it.  i'm going out to seek
your horses.'

our first thought, on his departure, was to force an exit somewhere.  we
tried the kitchen door, but that was fastened outside: we looked at the
windows--they were too narrow for even c
 
 ___________________________
 
bbing:--'won't you have me, and save me? not let me
come to the grange?  oh, darling catherine! you mustn't go and leave,
after all.  you _must_ obey my father--you _must_!'

'i must obey my own,' she replied, 'and relieve him from this cruel
suspense.  the whole night!  what would he think?  he'll be distressed
already.  i'll either break or burn a way out of the house.  be quiet!
you're in no danger; but if you hinder me--linton, i love papa better
than you!'  the mortal terror he felt of mr. heathcliff's anger restored
to the boy his coward's eloquence.  catherine was near distraught: still,
she persisted that she must go home, and tried entreaty in her turn,
persuading him to subdue his selfish agony.  while they were thus
occupied, our jailor re-entered.

'your beasts have trotted off,' he said, 'and--now linton! snivelling
again?  what has she been doing to you?  come, come--have done, and get
to bed.  in a month or two, my lad, you'll be able to pay her back her
present tyrannies with a v
 
 ___________________________
 
e in the world: and she shall have you!  there, to
bed!  zillah won't be here to-night; you must undress yourself.  hush!
hold your noise!  once in your own room, i'll not come near you: you
needn't fear.  by chance, you've managed tolerably.  i'll look to the
rest.'

he spoke these words, holding the door open for his son to pass, and the
latter achieved his exit exactly as a spaniel might which suspected the
person who attended on it of designing a spiteful squeeze.  the lock was
re-secured.  heathcliff approached the fire, where my mistress and i
stood silent.  catherine looked up, and instinctively raised her hand to
her cheek: his neighbourhood revived a painful sensation.  anybody else
would have been incapable of regarding the childish act with sternness,
but he scowled on her and muttered--'oh! you are not afraid of me?  your
courage is well disguised: you seem damnably afraid!'

'i _am_ afraid now,' she replied, 'because, if i stay, papa will be
miserable: and how can i endure making hi
 
 ___________________________
 
m miserable--when he--when
he--mr. heathcliff, let _me_ go home!  i promise to marry linton: papa
would like me to: and i love him.  why should you wish to force me to do
what i'll willingly do of myself?'

'let him dare to force you,' i cried.  'there's law in the land, thank
god! there is; though we be in an out-of-the-way place.  i'd inform if he
were my own son: and it's felony without benefit of clergy!'

'silence!' said the ruffian.  'to the devil with your clamour!  i don't
want _you_ to speak.  miss linton, i shall enjoy myself rem
 
 ___________________________
 
nce under my roof for the next twenty-four hours than informing me
that such an event would follow.  as to your promise to marry linton,
i'll take care you shall keep it; for you shall not quit this place till
it is fulfilled.'

'send ellen, then, to let papa know i'm safe!' exclaimed catherine,
weeping bitterly.  'or marry me now.  poor papa!  ellen, he'll think
we're lost.  what shall we do?'

'not he!  he'll think you are tired of waiting on him, and run off for a
little amusement,' answered heathcliff.  'you cannot deny that you
entered my house of your own accord, in contempt of his injunctions to
the contrary.  and it is quite natural that you should desire amusement
at your age; and that you would weary of nursing a sick man, and that man
_only_ your father.  catherine, his happiest days were over when your
days began.  he cursed you, i dare say, for coming into the world (i did,
at least); and it would just do if he cursed you as _he_ went out of it.
i'd join him.  i don't love you!  how
 
 ___________________________
 
ill think twice
before she takes the cockatrice!'

'i don't much mind speaking of his amiable qualities now,' he answered;
'because she must either accept him or remain a prisoner, and you along
with her, till your master dies.  i can detain you both, quite concealed,
here.  if you doubt, encourage her to retract her word, and you'll have
an opportunity of judging!'

'i'll not retract my word,' said catherine.  'i'll marry him within this
hour, if i may go to thrushcross grange afterwards.  mr. heathcliff,
you're a cruel man, but you're not a fiend; and you won't, from _mere_
malice, destroy irrevocably all my happiness.  if papa thought i had left
him on purpose, and if he died before i returned, could i bear to live?
i've given over crying: but i'm going to kneel here, at your knee; and
i'll not get up, and i'll not take my eyes from your face till you look
back at me!  no, don't turn away! _do look_! you'll see nothing to
provoke you.  i don't hate you.  i'm not angry that you struck me.  hav
 
 ___________________________
 
e
you never loved _anybody_ in all your life, uncle? _never_?  ah! you must
look once.  i'm so wretched, you can't help being sorry and pitying me.'

'keep your eft's fingers off; and move, or i'll kick you!' cried
heathcliff, brutally repulsing her.  'i'd rather be hugged by a snake.
how the devil can you dream of fawning on me?  i _detest_ you!'

he shrugged his shoulders: shook himself, indeed, as if his flesh crept
with aversion; and thrust back his chair; while i got up, and opened my
mouth, to commence a downright torrent of abuse.  but i was rendered dumb
in the middle of the first sentence, by a threat that i should be shown
into a room by myself the very next syllable i uttered.  it was growing
dark--we hea
 
 ___________________________
 
rd a sound of voices at the garden-gate.  our host hurried
out instantly: _he_ had his wits about him; _we_ had not.  there was a
talk of two or three minutes, and he returned alone.

'i thought it had been your cousin hareton,' i observed to catherine.  'i
wish he would arrive!  who knows but he might take our part?'

'it was three servants sent to seek you from the grange,' said
heathcliff, overhearing me.  'you should have opened a lattice and called
out: but i could swear that chit is glad you didn't.  she's glad to be
obliged to stay, i'm certain.'

at learning the chance we had missed, we both gave vent to our grief
without control; and he allowed us to wail on till nine o'clock.  then he
bid us go upstairs, through the kitchen, to zillah's chamber; and i
whispered my companion to obey: perhaps we might contrive to get through
the window there, or into a garret, and out by it
 
 ___________________________
 
e neither of us lay
down: catherine took her station by the lattice, and watched anxiously
for morning; a deep sigh being the only answer i could obtain to my
frequent entreaties that she would try to rest.  i seated myself in a
chair, and rocked to and fro, passing harsh judgment on my many
derelictions of duty; from which, it struck me then, all the misfortunes
of my employers sprang.  it was not the case, in reality, i am aware; but
it was, in my imagination, that dismal night; and i thought heathcliff
himself less guilty than i.

at seven o'clock he came, and inquired if miss linton had risen.  she ran
to the door immediately, and answered, 'yes.'  'here, then,' he said,
opening it, and pulling her out.  i rose to follow, but he turned the
lock again.  i demanded my release.

'be patient,' he replied; 'i'll send up your breakfast in a while.'

i thumped on the panels, and rattled the latch angrily and catherine
asked why i was still shut up?  he answered, i must try to endure it
another hour
 
 ___________________________
 
, and they went away.  i endured it two or three hours; at
length, i heard a footstep: not heathcliff's.

'i've brought you something to eat,' said a voice; 'oppen t' door!'

complying eagerly, i beheld hareton, laden with food enough to last me
all day.

'tak' it,' he added, thrusting the tray into my hand.

'stay one minute,' i began.

'nay,' cried he, and retired, regardless of any prayers i could pour
forth to detain him.

and there i remained enclosed the whole day, and the whole of the next
night; and another, and another.  five nights and four days i remained,
altogether, seeing nobody b
 
 ___________________________
 
l make you sing out sharply.'

'papa would make you sing out, if you attempted to get there,' he
answered.  'he says i'm not to be soft with catherine: she's my wife, and
it's shameful that she should wish to leave me.  he says she hates me and
wants me to die, that she may have my money; but she shan't have it: and
she shan't go home!  she never shall!--she may cry, and be sick as much
as she pleases!'

he resumed his former occupation, closing his lids, as if he meant to
drop asleep.

'master heathcliff,' i resumed, 'have you forgotten all catherine's
kindness to you last winter, when you affirmed you loved her, and when
she brought you books and sung you songs, and came many a time through
wind and snow to see you?  she wept to miss one evening, because you
would be disappointed; and you felt then that she was a hundred times too
good to you: and now you believe the lies your father tells, though you
know he detests you both.  and you join him against her.  that's fine
gratitude, is it not?'

 
 ___________________________
 

the corner of linton's mouth fell, and he took the sugar-candy from his
lips.

'did she come to wuthering heights because she hated you?' i continued.
'think for yourself!  as to your money, she does not even know that you
will have any.  and you say she's sick; and yet you leave her alone, up
there in a strange house!  you who have felt what it is to be so
neglected!  you could pity your own sufferings; and she pitied them, too;
but you won't pity hers!  i shed tears, master heathcliff, you see--an
elderly woman, and a servant merely--and you, after pretending such
affection, and having reason to worship her almost, store every tear you
have for yourself, and lie there quite at ease.  ah! you're a heartless,
selfish boy!'

'i can't stay with her,' he answered crossly.  'i'll not stay by myself.
she cries so i can't bear it.  and she won't give over, though i say i'll
call my father.  i did call him once, and he threatened to strangle her
if she was not quiet; but she began ag
 
 ___________________________
 
ain the instant he left the room,
moaning and grieving all night long, though i screamed for vexation that
i couldn't sleep.'

'is mr. heathcliff out?' i inquired, perceiving that the wretched
creature had no power to sympathize with his cousin's mental tortures.

'he's in the court,' he replied, 'talking to doctor kenneth; who says
uncle is dying, truly, at last.  i'm glad, for i shall be master of the
grange after him.  catherine always spoke of it as her house.  it isn't
hers!  it's mine: papa says everything she has is mine.  all her nice
books are mine; she offered to give me them, and her pretty birds, and
her pony minny, if i woul
 
 ___________________________
 
nually; and she looks so pale and wild, i'm afraid of her.'

'and you can get the key if you choose?' i said.

'yes, when i am up-stairs,' he answered; 'but i can't walk up-stairs
now.'

'in what apartment is it?' i asked.

'oh,' he cried, 'i shan't tell _you_ where it is.  it is our secret.
nobody, neither hareton nor zillah, is to know.  there! you've tired
me--go away, go away!'  and he turned his face on to his arm, and shut
his eyes again.

i considered it best to depart without seeing mr. heathcliff, and bring a
rescue for my young lady from the grange.  on reaching it, the
astonishment of my fellow-servants to see me, and their joy also, was
intense; and when they heard that their little mistress was safe, two or
three were about to hurry up and shout the news at mr. edgar's door: but
i bespoke the announcement of it myself.  how changed i found him, even
in those few days!  he lay an image of sadness and resignation awaiting
his death.  very young he looked: though his actual age was thi
 
 ___________________________
 
rty-nine,
one would have called him ten years younger, at least.  he thought of
catherine; for he murmured her name.  i touched his hand, and spoke.

'catherine is coming, dear master!' i whispered; 'she is alive and well;
and will be here, i hope, to-night.'

i trembled at the first effects of this intelligence: he half rose up,
looked eagerly round the apartment, and then sank back in a swoon.  as
soon as he recovered, i related our compulsory visit, and detention at
the heights.  i said heathcliff forced me to go in: which was not quite
true.  i uttered as little as possible against linton; nor did i describe
all his father's brutal conduct--my intentions being to add no
bitterness, if i could help it, to his already over-flowing cup.

he divined that one of his enemy's purposes was to secure the personal
property, as well as the estate, to his son: or rather himself; yet why
he did not wait till his decease was a puzzle to my master, because
ignorant how nearly he and his nephew would q
 
 ___________________________
 
uit the world together.
however, he felt that his will had better be altered: instead of leaving
catherine's fortune at her own disposal, he determined to put it in the
hands of trustees for her use during life, and for her children, if she
had any, after her.  by that means, it could not fall to mr. heathcliff
should linton die.

having received his orders, i despatched a man to fetch the attorney, and
four more, provided with serviceable weapons, to demand my young lady of
her jailor.  both parties were delayed very late.  the single servant
returned first.  he said mr. green, the lawyer, was out when he arrived
at his house, and he had to wait two hours for his re-entrance; and then
mr. green told him he had a little business in the village that must be
done; but he would be at thrushcross grange b
 
 ___________________________
 
efore morning.  the four men
came back unaccompanied also.  they brought word that catherine was ill:
too ill to quit her room; and heathcliff would not suffer them to see
her.  i scolded the stupid fellows well for listening to that tale, which
i would not carry to my master; resolving to take a whole bevy up to the
heights, at day-light, and storm it literally, unless the prisoner were
quietly surrendered to us.  her father _shall_ see her, i vowed, and
vowed again, if that devil be killed on his own doorstones in trying to
prevent it!

happily, i was spared the journey and the trouble.  i had gone
down-stairs at three o'clock to fe
 
 ___________________________
 
orney.  my own sweet little mistress
sprang on my neck sobbing, 'ellen, ellen!  is papa alive?'

'yes,' i cried: 'yes, my angel, he is, god be thanked, you are safe with
us again!'

she wanted to run, breathless as she was, up-stairs to mr. linton's room;
but i compelled her to sit down on a chair, and made her drink, and
washed her pale face, chafing it into a faint colour with my apron.  then
i said i must go first, and tell of her arrival; imploring her to say,
she should be happy with young heathcliff.  she stared, but soon
comprehending why i counselled her to utter the falsehood, she assured me
she would not complain.

i couldn't abide to be present at their meeting.  i stood outside the
chamber-door a quarter of an hour, and hardly ventured near the bed,
then.  all was composed, however: catherine's despair was as silent as
her father's joy.  she supported him calmly, in appearance; and he fixed
on her features his raised eyes that seemed dilating with ecstasy.

he died blissfully, mr. lo
 
 ___________________________
 
h, it was so entirely without a
struggle.

whether catherine had spent her tears, or whether the grief were too
weighty to let them flow, she sat there dry-eyed till the sun rose: she
sat till noon, and would still have remained brooding over that deathbed,
but i insisted on her coming away and taking some repose.  it was well i
succeeded in removing her, for at dinner-time appeared the lawyer, having
called at wuthering heights to get his instructions how to behave.  he
had sold himself to mr. heathcliff: that was the cause of his delay in
obeying my master's summons.  fortunately, no thought of worldly affairs
crossed the latter's mind, to disturb him, after his daughter's arrival.

mr. green took upon himself to order everything and everybody about the
place.  he gave all the servants but me, notice to quit.  he would have
carried his delegated authority to the point of insisting that edgar
linton should not be buried beside his wife, but in the chapel, with his
family.  there was the will, h
 
 ___________________________
 
owever, to hinder that, and my loud
protestations against any infringement of its directions.  the funeral
was hurried over; catherine, mrs. linton heathcliff now, was suffered to
stay at the grange till her father's corpse had quitted it.

she told me that her anguish had at last spurred linton to incur the risk
of liberating her.  she heard the men i sent disputing at the door, and
she gathered the sense of heathcliff's answer.  it drove her desperate.
linton who had been conveyed up to the little parlour soon after i left,
was terrified into fetching the key before his father re-ascended.  he
had the cunning to unlock and re-lock the door, without shutting it; and
when he should have gone to bed, he begged to sleep with hareton, and his
petition was granted for once.  catherine stole out before break of day.
she dared not try the doors lest the dogs should raise an alarm; she
visited the empty chambers and 
 
 ___________________________
 
iny which could await catherine would be
a permission to continue resident at the grange; at least during linton's
life: he being allowed to join her there, and i to remain as housekeeper.
that seemed rather too favourable an arrangement to be hoped for; and yet
i did hope, and began to cheer up under the prospect of retaining my home
and my employment, and, above all, my beloved young mistress; when a
servant--one of the discarded ones, not yet departed--rushed hastily in,
and said 'that devil heathcliff' was coming through the court: should he
fasten the door in his face?

if we had been mad enough to order that proceeding, we had not time.  he
made no ceremony of knocking or announcing his name: he was master, and
availed himself of the master's privilege to walk straight in, without
saying a word.  the sound of our informant's voice directed him to the
library; he entered and motioning him out, shut the door.

it was the same room into which he had been ushered, as a guest, eighteen
years be
 
 ___________________________
 
fore: the same moon shone through the window; and the same autumn
landscape lay outside.  we had not yet lighted a candle, but all the
apartment was visible, even to the portraits on the wall: the splendid
head of mrs. linton, and the graceful one of her husband.  heathcliff
advanced to the hearth.  time had little altered his person either.  there
was the same man: his dark face rather sallower and more composed, his
frame a stone or two heavier, perhaps, and no other difference.  catherine
had risen with an impulse to dash out, when she saw him.

'stop!' he said, arresting her by the arm.  'no more runnings away!  where
would you go?  i'm come to fetch you home; and i hope you'll be a dutiful
daughter and not encourage my son to further disobedience.  i was
embar
 
 ___________________________
 
ides, that lass owes me her services
for her bread.  i'm not going to nurture her in luxury and idleness after
linton is gone.  make haste and get ready, now; and don't oblige me to
compel you.'

'i shall,' said catherine.  'linton is all i have to love in the world,
and though you have done what you could to make him hateful to me, and me
to him, you cannot make us hate each other.  and i defy you to hurt him
when i am by, and i defy you to frighten me!'

'you are a boastful champion,' replied heathcliff; 'but i don't like you
well enough to hurt him: you shall get the full benefit of the torment,
as long as it lasts.  it is not i who will make him hateful to you--it is
his own sweet spirit.  he's as bitter as gall at your desertion and its
consequences: don't expect thanks for this noble devotion.  i heard him
draw a pleasant picture to zillah of what he would do if he were as
strong as i: the inclination is there, and his very weakness will sharpen
his wits to find a substitute for strength.'
 
 ___________________________
 


'i know he has a bad nature,' said catherine: 'he's your son.  but i'm
glad i've a better, to forgive it; and i know he loves me, and for that
reason i love him.  mr. heathcliff _you_ have _nobody_ to love you; and,
however miserable you make us, we shall still have the revenge of
thinking that your cruelty arises from your greater misery.  you _are_
miserable, are you not?  lonely, like the devil, and envious like him?
_nobody_ loves you--_nobody_ will cry for you when you die!  i wouldn't
be you!'

catherine spoke with a kind of dreary triumph: she seemed to have made up
her mind to enter into the spirit of her future family, and draw pleasure
from the griefs of her 
 
 ___________________________
 
ught,
once, i would have stayed there: when i saw her face again--it is hers
yet!--he had hard work to stir me; but he said it would change if the air
blew on it, and so i struck one side of the coffin loose, and covered it
up: not linton's side, damn him!  i wish he'd been soldered in lead.  and
i bribed the sexton to pull it away when i'm laid there, and slide mine
out too; i'll have it made so: and then by the time linton gets to us
he'll not know which is which!'

'you were very wicked, mr. heathcliff!' i exclaimed; 'were you not
ashamed to disturb the dead?'

'i disturbed nobody, nelly,' he replied; 'and i gave some ease to myself.
i shall be a great deal more comfortable now; and you'll have a better
chance of keeping me underground, when i get there.  disturbed her?  no!
she has disturbed me, night and day, through eighteen
years--incessantly--remorselessly--till yesternight; and yesternight i
was tranquil.  i dreamt i was sleeping the last sleep by that sleeper,
with my heart stopped and
 
 ___________________________
 
me pillow as she did when a child; and i must open my lids to
see.  and so i opened and closed them a hundred times a night--to be
always disappointed!  it racked me!  i've often groaned aloud, till that
old rascal joseph no doubt believed that my conscience was playing the
fiend inside of me.  now, since i've seen her, i'm pacified--a little.  it
was a strange way of killing: not by inches, but by fractions of
hairbreadths, to beguile me with the spectre of a hope through eighteen
years!'

mr. heathcliff paused and wiped his forehead; his hair clung to it, wet
with perspiration; his eyes were fixed on the red embers of the fire, the
brows not contracted, but raised next the temples; diminishing the grim
aspect of his countenance, but imparting a peculiar look of trouble, and
a painful appearance of mental tension towards one absorbing subject.  he
only half addressed me, and i maintained silence.  i didn't like to hear
him talk!  after a short period he resumed his meditation on the picture,
to
 
 ___________________________
 
ok it down and leant it against the sofa to contemplate it at better
advantage; and while so occupied catherine entered, announcing that she
was ready, when her pony should be saddled.

'send that over to-morrow,' said heathcliff to me; then turning to her,
he added: 'you may do without your pony: it is a fine evening, and you'll
need no ponies at wuthering heights; for what journeys you take, your own
feet will serve you.  come along.'

'good-bye, ellen!' whispered my dear little mistress.

as she kissed me, her lips felt like ice.  'come and see me, ellen; don't
forget.'

'take care you do no such thing, mrs. dean!' said her new father.  'when
i wish to speak to you i'll come here.  i want none of your prying at my
ho
 
 ___________________________
 
use!'

he signed her to precede him; and casting back a look that cut my heart,
she obeyed.  i watched them, from the window, walk down the garden.
heathcliff fixed catherine's arm under his: though she disputed the act
at first evidently; and with rapid strides he hurried her into the alley,
whose trees concealed them.




chapter xxx


i have paid a visit to the heights, but i have not seen her since she
left: joseph held the door in his hand when i called to ask after her,
and wouldn't let me pass.  he said mrs. linton was 'thrang,' and the
master was not in.  zillah has told me something of the way they go on,
otherwise i should hardly know who w
 
 ___________________________
 
as dead and who living.  she thinks
catherine haughty, and does not like her, i can guess by her talk.  my
young lady asked some aid of her when she first came; but mr. heathcliff
told her to follow her own business, and let his daughter-in-law look
after herself; and zillah willingly acquiesced, being a narrow-minded,
selfish woman.  catherine evinced a child's annoyance at this neglect;
repaid it with contempt, and thus enlisted my informant among her
enemies, as securely as if she had done her some great wrong.  i had a
long talk with zillah about six weeks ago, a little before you came, one
day when we foregathered on the moor; and this is what she told me.

'the fir
 
 ___________________________
 
st thing mrs. linton did,' she said, 'on her arrival at the
heights, was to run up-stairs, without even wishing good-evening to me
and joseph; she shut herself into linton's room, and remained till
morning.  then, while the master and earnshaw were at breakfast, she
entered the house, and asked all in a quiver if the doctor might be sent
for? her cousin was very ill.

'"we know that!" answered heathcliff; "but his life is not worth a
farthing, and i won't spend a farthing on him."

'"but i cannot tell how to do," she said; "and if nobody will help me,
he'll die!"

'"walk out of the room," cried the master, "and let me never hear a word
more about him!  none here care what becomes of him; if you do, act the
nurse; if you do not, lock him up and leave him."

'then she began to bother me, and i said i'd had enough plague with the
tiresome thing; we each had our tasks, and hers was to wait on linto
 
 ___________________________
 
n:
mr. heathcliff bid me leave that labour to her.

'how they managed together, i can't tell.  i fancy he fretted a great
deal, and moaned hisseln night and day; and she had precious little rest:
one could guess by her white face and heavy eyes.  she sometimes came
into the kitchen all wildered like, and looked as if she would fain beg
assistance; but i was not going to disobey the master: i never dare
disobey him, mrs. dean; and, though i thought it wrong that kenneth
should not be sent for, it was no concern o
 
 ___________________________
 
f mine either to advise or
complain, and i always refused to meddle.  once or twice, after we had
gone to bed, i've happened to open my door again and seen her sitting
crying on the stairs'-top; and then i've shut myself in quick, for fear
of being moved to interfere.  i did pity her then, i'm sure: still i
didn't wish to lose my place, you know.

'at last, one night she came boldly into my chamber, and frightened me
out of my wits, by saying, "tell mr. heathcliff that his son is dying--i'm
sure he is, this time.  get up, instantly, and tell him."

'having uttered this speech, she vanished again.  i lay a quarter of an
hour listening and trembling.  nothing stirred--the house was quiet.

'she's mistaken, i said to myself.  he's got over it.  i needn't disturb
them; and i began to doze.  but my sleep was marred a second time by a
sharp ringing of the bell--the only bell we have, put up on purpose for
linton; and the master called to me to see what was the
 
 ___________________________
 
 matter, and
inform them that he wouldn't have that noise repeated.

'i delivered catherine's message.  he cursed to himself, and in a few
minutes came out with a lighted candle, and proceeded to their room.  i
followed.  mrs. heathcliff was seated by the bedside, with her hands
folded on her knees.  her father-in-law went up, held the light to
linton's face, looked at him, and touched him; afterwards he turned to
her.

'"now--catherine," he said, "how do you feel?"

'she was dumb.

'"how do you feel, catherine?" he repeated.

'"he's safe, and i'm free," she answered: "i should feel well--but," she
continued, with a bitterness she couldn't conceal, "you have left me so
long to struggle against death alone, that i feel and see o
 
 ___________________________
 
ke it, too!  i gave her a little wine.  hareton and
joseph, who had been wakened by the ringing and the sound of feet, and
heard our talk from outside, now entered.  joseph was fain, i believe, of
the lad's removal; hareton seemed a thought bothered: though he was more
taken up with staring at catherine than thinking of linton.  but the
master bid him get off to bed again: we didn't want his help.  he
afterwards made joseph remove the body to his chamber, and told me to
return to mine, and mrs. heathcliff remained by herself.

'in the morning, he sent me to tell her she must come down to breakfast:
she had undressed, and appeared going to sleep, and said she was ill; at
which i hardly wondered.  i informed mr. heathcliff, and he
replied,--"well, let her be till after the funeral; and go up now and
then to get her what is needful; and, as soon as she seems better, tell
me."'

cathy stayed upstairs a fortnight, according to zillah; who visited her
twice a day, and would have been rather more frien
 
 ___________________________
 
dly, but her attempts
at increasing kindness were proudly and promptly repelled.

heathcliff went up once, to show her linton's will.  he had bequeathed
the whole of his, and what had been her, moveable property, to his
father: the poor creature was threatened, or coaxed, into that act during
her week's absence, when his uncle died.  the lands, being a minor, he
could not meddle with.  however, mr. heathcliff has claimed and kept them
in his wife's right and his also: i suppose legally; at any rate,
catherine, destitute of cash and friends, cannot disturb his possession.

'nobody,' said zillah, 'ever approached her door, except that once, but
i; and nobody asked anything about her.  the first occasion of her coming
down into the house was on a sunday afternoon.  she had cried out, when i
carried up her dinner, that she couldn't bear any longer being in the
cold; and i told her the master was going t
 
 ___________________________
 
o thrushcross grange, and
earnshaw and i needn't hinder her from descending; so, as soon as she
heard heathcliff's horse trot off, she made her appearance, donned in
black, and her yellow curls combed back behind her ears as plain as a
quaker: she couldn't comb them out.

'joseph and i generally go to chapel on sundays:' the kirk, you know, has
no minister now, explained mrs. dean; and they call the methodists' or
baptists' place (i can't say which it is) at gimmerton, a chapel.  'joseph
had gone,' she continued, 'but i thought proper to bide at home.  young
folks are always the better for an elder's over
 
 ___________________________
 
et of you, will be good enough to
understand that i reject any pretence at kindness you have the hypocrisy
to offer!  i despise you, and will have nothing to say to any of you!
when i would have given my life for one kind word, even to see one of
your faces, you all kept off.  but i won't complain to you!  i'm driven
down here by the cold; not either to amuse you or enjoy your society."

'"what could i ha' done?" began earnshaw.  "how was i to blame?"

'"oh! you are an exception," answered mrs. heathcliff.  "i never missed
such a concern as you."

'"but i offered more than once, and asked," he said, kindling up at her
pertness, "i asked mr. heathcliff to let me wake for you--"

'"be silent!  i'll go out of doors, or anywhere, rather than have your
disagreeable voice in my ear!" said my lady.

'hareton muttered she might go to hell, for him! and unslinging his gun,
restrained himself from his sunday occupations no longer.  he talked now,
freely enough; and she presently saw fit to retreat to her 
 
 ___________________________
 
od nature: ever since, i've been as
stiff as herself; and she has no lover or liker among us: and she does
not deserve one; for, let them say the least word to her, and she'll curl
back without respect of any one.  she'll snap at the master himself, and
as good as dares him to thrash her; and the more hurt she gets, the more
venomous she grows.'

at first, on hearing this account from zillah, i determined to leave my
situation, take a cottage, and get catherine to come and live with me:
but mr. heathcliff would as soon permit that as he would set up hareton
in an independent house; and i can see no remedy, at present, unless she
could marry again; and that scheme it does not come within my province to
arrange.

* * * * *

thus ended mrs. dean's story.  notwithstanding the doctor's prophecy, i
am rapidly recovering strength; and though it be only the second week in
january, i propose getting out on horseback in a day or two, and riding
over to wuthering heights, to inform my landlord that i shall
 
 ___________________________
 
ar a little note from her to
her young lady, and i did not refuse, for the worthy woman was not
conscious of anything odd in her request.  the front door stood open, but
the jealous gate was fastened, as at my last visit; i knocked and invoked
earnshaw from among the garden-beds; he unchained it, and i entered.  the
fellow is as handsome a rustic as need be seen.  i took particular notice
of him this time; but then he does his best apparently to make the least
of his advantages.

i asked if mr. heathcliff were at home?  he answered, no; but he would be
in at dinner-time.  it was eleven o'clock, and i announced my intention
of going in and waiting for him; at which he immediately flung down his
tools and accompanied me, in the office of watchdog, not as a substitute
for the host.

we entered together; catherine was there, making herself useful in
preparing some vegetables for the approaching meal; she looked more
sulky and less spirited than when i had seen her first. she hardly
raised her eyes t
 
 ___________________________
 
ending to desire a view of the garden; and, as i fancied, adroitly
dropped mrs. dean's note on to her knee, unnoticed by hareton--but she
asked aloud, 'what is that?'  and chucked it off.

'a letter from your old acquaintance, the housekeeper at the grange,' i
answered; annoyed at her exposing my kind deed, and fearful lest it
should be imagined a missive of my own.  she would gladly have gathered
it up at this information, but hareton beat her; he seized and put it in
his waistcoat, saying mr. heathcliff should look at it first.  thereat,
catherine silently turned her face from us, and, very stealthily, drew
out her pocket-handkerchief and applied it to her eyes; and her cousin,
after struggling awhile to keep down his softer feelings, pulled out the
letter and flung it on the floor beside her, as ungraciously as he could.
catherine caught and perused it eagerly; then she put a few questions to
me concerning the inmates, rational and irrational, of her former home;
and gazing towards the hills,
 
 ___________________________
 
 murmured in soliloquy:

'i should like to be riding minny down there!  i should like to be
climbing up there!  oh!  i'm tired--i'm _stalled_, hareton!'  and she
leant her pretty head back against the sill, with half a yawn and half a
sigh, and lapsed into an aspect of abstracted sadness: neither caring nor
knowing whether we remarked her.

'mrs. heathcliff,' i said, after sitting some time mute, 'you are not
aware that i am an acquaintance of yours? so intimate that i think it
strange you won't come and speak to me.  my housekeeper never wearies of
talking about and praising you; and she'll be greatly disappointed if i
return with no news of or from you, except that you received her letter
and said nothing!'

she appeared to wonder at this speech, and asked,--

'does ellen like you?'

'yes, very well,' i replied, hesitatingly.

'you must tell her
 
 ___________________________
 
,' she continued, 'that i would answer her letter, but
i have no materials for writing: not even a book from which i might tear
a leaf.'

'no books!' i exclaimed.  'how do you contrive to live here without them?
if i may take the liberty to inquire.  though provided with a large
library, i'm frequently very dull at the grange; take my books away, and
i should be desperate!'

'i was always reading, when i had them,' said catherine; 'and mr.
heathcliff never reads; so he took it into his head to destroy my books.
i have not had a glimpse of one for weeks.  only once, i searched through
joseph's store of theology, to his great irritation; and once, hareton, i
came upon a secret stock in your room--some latin and greek, and some
tales and poetry: all old friends.  i brought the last here--and you
gathered them, as a magpie gathers silver spoons, for the mere love of
stealing!  they are of no use to you; or else you concealed them in the
bad spi
 
 ___________________________
 
rit that, as you cannot enjoy them, nobody else shall.  perhaps
_your_ envy counselled mr. heathcliff to rob me of my treasures?  but
i've most of them written on my brain and printed in my heart, and you
cannot deprive me of those!'

earnshaw blushed crimson when his cousin made this revelation of his
private literary accumulations, and stammered an indignant denial of her
accusations.

'mr. hareton is desirous of increasing his amount of knowledge,' i said,
coming to his rescue.  'he is not _envious_, but _emulous_ of your
attainments.  he'll be a clever scholar in a few years.'

'and he want
 
 ___________________________
 
 as you did yesterday: it
was extremely funny.  i heard you; and i heard you turning over the
dictionary to seek out the hard words, and then cursing because you
couldn't read their explanations!'

the young man evidently thought it too bad that he should be laughed at
for his ignorance, and then laughed at for trying to remove it.  i had a
similar notion; and, remembering mrs. dean's anecdote of his first
attempt at enlightening the darkness in which he had been reared, i
observed,--'but, mrs. heathcliff, we have each had a commencement, and
each stumbled and tottered on the threshold; had our teachers scorned
instead of aiding us, we should stumble and totter yet.'

'oh!' she replied, 'i don't wish to limit his acquirements: still, he has
no right to appropriate what is mine, and make it ridiculous to me with
his vile mistakes and mispronunciations!  those books, both prose and
verse, are consecrated to me by other associations; and i hate to have
them debased and profaned in his mouth!  besid
 
 ___________________________
 
 from one and winning him to the other, his endeavours to
raise himself had produced just the contrary result.

'yes that's all the good that such a brute as you can get from them!'
cried catherine, sucking her damaged lip, and watching the conflagration
with indignant eyes.

'you'd _better_ hold your tongue, now,' he answered fiercely.

and his agitation precluded further speech; he advanced hastily to the
entrance, where i made way for him to pass.  but ere he had crossed the
door-stones, mr. heathcliff, coming up the causeway, encountered him, and
laying hold of his shoulder asked,--'what's to do now, my lad?'

'naught, naught,' he said, and broke away to enjoy his grief and anger in
solitude.

heathcliff gazed after him, and sighed.

'it will be odd if i thwart myself,' he muttered, unconscious that i was
behind him.  'but when i look for his father in his face, i find _her_
every day more!  how the devil is he so like?  i can hardly bear to see
him.'

he bent his eyes to the ground, and wal
 
 ___________________________
 
ted.  'should you wish it, i'll settle with you now,' and i drew my
note-book from my pocket.

'no, no,' he replied, coolly; 'you'll leave sufficient behind to cover
your debts, if you fail to return: i'm not in such a hurry.  sit down and
take your dinner with us; a guest that is safe from repeating his visit
can generally be made welcome.  catherine! bring the things in: where are
you?'

catherine reappeared, bearing a tray of knives and forks.

'you may get your dinner with joseph,' muttered heathcliff, aside, 'and
remain in the kitchen till he is gone.'

she obeyed his directions very punctually: perhaps she had no temptation
to transgress.  living among clowns and misanthropists, she probably
cannot appreciate a better class of people when she meets them.

with mr. heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on the one hand, and hareton,
absolutely dumb, on the other, i made a somewhat cheerless meal, and bade
adieu early.  i would have departed by the back way, to get a last
glimpse of catherine and a
 
 ___________________________
 
nnoy old joseph; but hareton received orders to
lead up my horse, and my host himself escorted me to the door, so i could
not fulfil my wish.

'how dreary life gets over in that house!' i reflected, while riding down
the road.  'what a realisation of something more romantic than a fairy
tale it would have been for mrs. linton heathcliff, had she and i struck
up an attachment, as her good nurse desired, and migrated together into
the stirring atmosphere of the town!'




chapter xxxii


1802.--this september i was invited to devastate the moors of a friend in
the north, and on my journey to his abode, i unexpectedly came within
fifteen miles of gimmerton.  the ostler at a roadside public-house was
holding a pail of water to refresh my horses, when a cart of very green
oats, newly reaped, passed by, and he remarked,--'yon's frou
 
 ___________________________
 
 well at the heights?' i inquired of the woman.

'eea, f'r owt ee knaw!' she answered, skurrying away with a pan of hot
cinders.

i would have asked why mrs. dean had deserted the grange, but it was
impossible to delay her at such a crisis, so i turned away and made my
exit, rambling leisurely along, with the glow of a sinking sun behind,
and the mild glory of a rising moon in front--one fading, and the other
brightening--as i quitted the park, and climbed the stony by-road
branching off to mr. heathcliff's dwelling.  before i arrived in sight of
it, all that remained of day was a beamless amber light along the west:
but i could see every pebble on the path, and every blade of grass, by
that splendid moon.  i had neither to climb the gate nor to knock--it
yielded to my hand.  that is an improvement, i thought.  and i noticed
another, by the aid of my nostrils; a fragrance of stocks and wallflowers
wafted on the air from amongst the homely fruit-trees.

both doors and lattices were open; and yet,
 
 ___________________________
 
g"--a bonny tune--it goes to
a dance.'

mrs. dean was about to recommence, when i advanced; and recognising me
directly, she jumped to her feet, crying--'why, bless you, mr. lockwood!
how could you think of returning in this way?  all's shut up at
thrushcross grange.  you should have given us notice!'

'i've arranged to be accommodated there, for as long as i shall stay,' i
answered.  'i depart again to-morrow.  and how are you transplanted here,
mrs. dean? tell me that.'

'zillah left, and mr. heathcliff wished me to come, soon after you went
to london, and stay till you returned.  but, step in, pray! have you
walked from gimmerton this evening?'

'from the grange,' i replied; 'and while they make me lodging room there,
i want to finish my business with your master; because i don't think of
having another opportunity in a hurry.'

'what business, sir?' said nelly, conducting me into the house. 'he's
gone out at present, and won't return soon.'

'about the rent,' i answered.

'oh! then it is wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h mrs. heathcliff you must settle,' she observed; 'or
rather with me.  she has not learnt to manage her affairs yet, and i act
for her: there's nobody else.'

i looked surprised.

'ah! you have not heard of heathcliff's death, i see,' she continued.

'heathcliff dead!' i exclaimed, astonished.  'how long ago?'

'three months since: but sit down, and let me take your hat, and i'll
tell you all about it.  stop, you have had nothing to eat, have you?'

'i want nothing: i have ordered supper at home.  you sit down too. i
never dreamt of his dying!  let me hear how it came to pass.  you say you
don't expect them back for some time--the young people?'

'no--i have to scold them every evening for their late rambles: but they
don't care for me.  at least, have
 
 ___________________________
 
le; it will do you
good: you seem weary.'

she hastened to fetch it before i could refuse, and i heard joseph asking
whether 'it warn't a crying scandal that she should have followers at her
time of life?  and then, to get them jocks out o' t' maister's cellar!  he
fair shaamed to 'bide still and see it.'

she did not stay to retaliate, but re-entered in a minute, bearing a
reaming silver pint, whose contents i lauded with becoming earnestness.
and afterwards she furnished me with the sequel of heathcliff's history.
he had a 'queer' end, as she expressed it.

i was summoned to wuthering heights, within a fortnight of your leaving
us, she said; and i obeyed joyfully, for catherine's sake. my first
interview with her grieved and shocked me: she had altered so much since
our separation.  mr. heathcliff did not explain his reasons for taking a
new mind about my coming here; he only told me he wanted me, and he was
tired of seeing catherine: i must make the little parlour my
sitting-room, and keep he
 
 ___________________________
 
smoking
with joseph; and they sat like automatons, one on each side of the fire,
the elder happily too deaf to understand her wicked nonsense, as he would
have called it, the younger doing his best to seem to disregard it.  on
fine evenings the latter followed his shooting expeditions, and catherine
yawned and sighed, and teased me to talk to her, and ran off into the
court or garden the moment i began; and, as a last resource, cried, and
said she was tired of living: her life was useless.

mr. heathcliff, who grew more and more disinclined to society, had almost
banished earnshaw from his apartment.  owing to an accident at the
commencement of march, he became for some days a fixture in the kitchen.
his gun burst while out on the hills by himself; a splinter cut his arm,
and he lost a good deal of blood before he could reach home.  the
consequence was that, perforce, he was condemned to the fireside and
tranquillity, till he made it up again.  it suited catherine to have him
there: at any rate,
 
 ___________________________
 
uld be friends with your cousin, mr. hareton,' i interrupted,
'since she repents of her sauciness.  it would do you a great deal of
good: it would make you another man to have her for a companion.'

'a companion!' he cried; 'when she hates me, and does not think me fit to
wipe her shoon!  nay, if it made me a king, i'd not be scorned for
seeking her good-will any more.'

'it is not i who hate you, it is you who hate me!' wept cathy, no longer
disguising her trouble.  'you hate me as much as mr. heathcliff does, and
more.'

'you're a damned liar,' began earnshaw: 'why have i made him angry, by
taking your part, then, a hundred times? and that when you sneered at and
despised me, and--go on plaguing me, and i'll step in yonder, and say you
worried me out of the kitchen!'

'i didn't know you took my part,' she answered, drying her eyes; 'and i
was miserable and bitter at everybody; but now i thank you, and beg you
to forgive me: what can i do besides?'

she returned to the hearth, and frankly exten
 
 ___________________________
 
t roof before; except, perhaps,
during her earliest visits to linton.

the intimacy thus commenced grew rapidly; though it encountered temporary
interruptions.  earnshaw was not to be civilized with a wish, and my
young lady was no philosopher, and no paragon of patience; but both their
minds tending to the same point--one loving and desiring to esteem, and
the other loving and desiring to be esteemed--they contrived in the end
to reach it.

you see, mr. lockwood, it was easy enough to win mrs. heathcliff's heart.
but now, i'm glad you did not try.  the crown of all my wishes will be
the union of those two.  i shall envy no one on their wedding day: there
won't be a happier woman than myself in england!




chapter xxxiii


on the morrow of that monday, earnshaw being still unable to follow his
ordinary employments, and therefore remaining about the house, i speedily
found it would be impracticable to retain my charge beside me, as
heretofore.  she got downstairs before me, and out into the gard
 
 ___________________________
 
r-bed in the midst of them.

'there!  that will be all shown to the master,' i exclaimed, 'the minute
it is discovered.  and what excuse have you to offer for taking such
liberties with the garden?  we shall have a fine explosion on the head of
it: see if we don't!  mr. hareton, i wonder you should have no more wit
than to go and make that mess at her bidding!'

'i'd forgotten they were joseph's,' answered earnshaw, rather puzzled;
'but i'll tell him i did it.'

we always ate our meals with mr. heathcliff.  i held the mistress's post
in making tea and carving; so i was indispensable at table.  catherine
usually sat by me, but to-day she stole nearer to hareton; and i
presently saw she would have no more discretion in her friendship than
she had in her hostility.

'now, mind you don't talk with and notice your cousin too much,' were my
whispered instructions as we entered the room.  'it will certainly annoy
mr. heathcliff, and he'll be mad at you both.'

'i'm not going to,' she answered.

the min
 
 ___________________________
 
ing primroses in
his plate of porridge.

he dared not speak to her there: he dared hardly look; and yet she went
on teasing, till he was twice on the point of being provoked to laugh.  i
frowned, and then she glanced towards the master: whose mind was occupied
on other subjects than his company, as his countenance evinced; and she
grew serious for an instant, scrutinizing him with deep gravity.
afterwards she turned, and recommenced her nonsense; at last, hareton
uttered a smothered laugh.  mr. heathcliff started; his eye rapidly
surveyed our faces, catherine met it with her accustomed look of
nervousness and yet defiance, which he abhorred.

'it is well you are out of my reach,' he exclaimed.  'what fiend
possesses you to stare back at me, continually, with those infernal eyes?
down with them! and don't remind me of your existence again.  i thought i
had cured you of laughing.'

'it was me,' muttered hareton.

'what do you say?' demanded the master.

hareton looked at his plate, and did not rep
 
 ___________________________
 
eat the confession.  mr.
heathcliff looked at him a bit, and then silently resumed his breakfast
and his interrupted musing.  we had nearly finished, and the two young
people prudently shifted wider asunder, so i anticipated no further
disturbance during that sitting: when joseph appeared at the door,
revealing by his quivering lip and furious eyes that the outrage
committed on his precious shrubs was detected.  he must have seen cathy
and her cousin about the spot before he examined it, for while his jaws
worked like those of a 
 
 ___________________________
 
t i'd lug my books up into t' garret,
and all my bits o' stuff, and they sud hev' t' kitchen to theirseln; for
t' sake o' quietness.  it wur hard to gie up my awn hearthstun, but i
thowt i _could_ do that!  but nah, shoo's taan my garden fro' me, and by
th' heart, maister, i cannot stand it!  yah may bend to th' yoak an ye
will--i noan used to 't, and an old man doesn't sooin get used to new
barthens.  i'd rayther arn my bite an' my sup wi' a hammer in th' road!'

'now, now, idiot!' interrupted heathcliff, 'cut it short!  what's your
grievance?  i'll interfere in no quarrels between you and nelly.  she may
thrust you into the coal-hole for anything i care.'

'it's noan nelly!' answered joseph.  'i sudn't shift for nelly--nasty ill
nowt as shoo is.  thank god! _shoo_ cannot stale t' sowl o' nob'dy!  shoo
wer niver soa handsome, but what a body mud look at her 'bout winking.
it's yon flaysome, graceless quean, that's witched our lad, wi' her bold
een and her forrard ways--till--nay! it fair brusts
 
 ___________________________
 
 my heart!  he's
forgotten all i've done for him, and made on him, and goan and riven up a
whole row o' t' grandest currant-trees i' t' garden!' and here he
lamented outright; unmanned by a sense of his bitter injuries, and
earnshaw's ingratitude and dangerous condition.

'is the fool drunk?' asked mr. heathcliff.  'hareton, is it you he's
finding fault with?'

'i've pulled up two or three bushes,' replied the young man; 'but i'm
going to set 'em again.'

'and why have you pulled them up?' said the master.

catherine wisely put in her tongue.

'we wanted to plant some flowers there,' she cried.  'i'm the only person
to blame, for i wished him to do it.'

'and who the devil gave _you_ leave to touch a stick about the place?'
demanded her father-in-law, much surprised.  'and who ordered _you_ to
obey her?
 
 ___________________________
 
' he added, turning to hareton.

the latter was speechless; his cousin replied--'you shouldn't grudge a
few yards of earth for me to ornament, when you have taken all my land!'

'your land, insolent slut!  you never had any,' said heathcliff.

'and my money,' she continued; returning his angry glare, and meantime
biting a piece of crust, the remnant of her breakfast.

'silence!' he exclaimed.  'get done, and begone!'

'and hareton's land, and his money,' pursued the reckless thing.  'hareton
and i are friends now; and i shall tell him all about you!'

the master seemed confounded a moment: he grew pale, and rose up, eyeing
her all the while, with an expression of mortal hate.

'if you strike me, hareton will strike you,' she said; 
 
 ___________________________
 
'so you may as
well sit down.'

'if hareton does not turn you out of the room, i'll strike him to hell,'
thundered heathcliff.  'damnable witch! dare you pretend to rouse him
against me?  off with her!  do you hear?  fling her into the kitchen!
i'll kill her, ellen dean, if you let her come into my sight again!'

hareton tried, under his breath, to persuade her to go.

'drag her away!' he cried, savagely.  'are you staying to talk?'  and he
approached to execute his own command.

'he'll not obey you, wicked man, any more,' said catherine; 'and he'll
soon detest you as much as i do.'

'wisht! wisht!' muttered the young
 
 ___________________________
 
 man, reproachfully; 'i will not hear
you speak so to him.  have done.'

'but you won't let him strike me?' she cried.

'come, then,' he whispered earnestly.

it was too late: heathcliff had caught hold of her.

'now, _you_ go!' he said to earnshaw.  'accursed witch! this time she has
provoked me when i could not bear it; and i'll make her repent it for
ever!'

he had his hand in her hair; hareton attempted to release her locks,
entreating him not to hurt her that once.  heathcliff's black eyes
flashed; he seemed ready to tear catherine in pieces, and i was just
worked up to risk coming to the rescue, when of a sudden his fingers
relaxed; he shifted his grasp from her head to her arm, and gazed
intently in her face.  then he drew his hand over his eyes, stood a
moment to collect himself apparently, and turning anew to catherine,
said, with assumed calmness--'you must learn to avoid putting me in a
passion, or i shall really murder you some time!  go with mrs. dean, and
ke
 
 ___________________________
 
ep with her; and confine your insolence to her ears.  as to hareton
earnshaw, if i see him listen to you, i'll send him seeking his bread
where he can get it!  your love will make him an outcast and a beggar.
nelly, take her; and leave me, all of you!  leave me!'

i led my young lady out: she was too glad of her escape to resist; the
other followed, and mr. heathcliff had the room to himself till dinner.  i
had counselled catherine to dine up-stairs; but, as soon as he perceived
her vacant seat, he sent me to call her.  he spoke to none of us, ate
very little, and went out directly afterwards, intimating that he should
not return before evening.

the two new friends established themselves in the house during his
absence; where i heard hareton sternly check his cousin, on her offering
a revelation of her father-in-law's conduct to his father.  he said he
woul
 
 ___________________________
 
dn't suffer a word to be uttered in his disparagement: if he were the
devil, it didn't signify; he would stand by him; and he'd rather she
would abuse himself, as she used to, than begin on mr. heathcliff.
catherine was waxing cross at this; but he found means to make her hold
her tongue, by asking how she would like _him_ to speak ill of her
father?  then she comprehended that earnshaw took the master's reputation
home to himself; and was attached by ties stronger than reason could
break--chains, forged by habit, which it would be cruel to attempt to
loosen.  she showed a good heart, thenceforth, in avoiding both
complaints and expressions of antipathy concerning heathcliff; and
confessed to me
 
 ___________________________
 
heads to glance at him.  well, i reflected, there was
never a pleasanter, or more harmless sight; and it will be a burning
shame to scold them.  the red fire-light glowed on their two bonny heads,
and revealed their faces animated with the eager interest of children;
for, though he was twenty-three and she eighteen, each had so much of
novelty to feel and learn, that neither experienced nor evinced the
sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity.

they lifted their eyes together, to encounter mr. heathcliff: perhaps you
have never remarked that their eyes are precisely similar, and they are
those of catherine earnshaw.  the present catherine has no other likeness
to her, except a breadth of forehead, and a certain arch of the nostril
that makes her appear rather haughty, whether she will or not.  with
hareton the resemblance is carried farther: it is singular at all times,
_then_ it was particularly striking; because his senses were alert, and
his mental faculties wakened to unwonted activity.  i 
 
 ___________________________
 
suppose this
resemblance disarmed mr. heathcliff: he walked to the hearth in evident
agitation; but it quickly subsided as he looked at the young man: or, i
should say, altered its character; for it was there yet.  he took the
book from his hand, and glanced at the open page, then returned it
without any observation; merely signing catherine away: her companion
lingered very little behind her, and i was about to depart also, but he
bid me sit still.

'it is a poor conclusion, is it not?' he observed, having brooded awhile
on the scene he had 
 
 ___________________________
 
 ghost of my immortal love; of my wild
endeavours to hold my right; my degradation, my pride, my happiness, and
my anguish--

'but it is frenzy to repeat these thoughts to you: only it will let you
know why, with a reluctance to be always alone, his society is no
benefit; rather an aggravation of the constant torment i suffer: and it
partly contributes to render me regardless how he and his cousin go on
together.  i can give them no attention any more.'

'but what do you mean by a _change_, mr. heathcliff?' i said, alarmed at
his manner: though he was neither in danger of losing his senses, nor
dying, according to my judgment: he was quite strong and healthy; and, as
to his reason, from childhood he had a delight in dwelling on dark
things, and entertaining odd fancies.  he might have had a monomania on
the subject of his departed idol; but on every other point his wits were
as sound as mine.

'i shall not know that till it comes,' he said; 'i'm only half conscious
of it now.'

'you have no feel
 
 ___________________________
 
.  i wondered greatly how it would
end.  though he seldom before had revealed this state of mind, even by
looks, it was his habitual mood, i had no doubt: he asserted it himself;
but not a soul, from his general bearing, would have conjectured the
fact.  you did not when you saw him, mr. lockwood: and at the period of
which i speak, he was just the same as then; only fonder of continued
solitude, and perhaps still more laconic in company.




chapter xxxiv


for some days after that evening mr. heathcliff shunned meeting us at
meals; yet he would not consent formally to exclude hareton and cathy.  he
had an aversion to yielding so completely to his feelings, choosing
rather to absent himself; and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed
sufficient sustenance for him.

one night, after the family were in bed, i heard him go downstairs, and
out at the front door.  i did not hear him re-enter, and in the morning i
found he was still away.  we were in april then: the weather was sweet
and warm, the g
 
 ___________________________
 
nd sitting with my
work under the fir-trees at the end of the house; and she beguiled
hareton, who had perfectly recovered from his accident, to dig and
arrange her little garden, which was shifted to that corner by the
influence of joseph's complaints.  i was comfortably revelling in the
spring fragrance around, and the beautiful soft blue overhead, when my
young lady, who had run down near the gate to procure some primrose roots
for a border, returned only half laden, and informed us that mr.
heathcliff was coming in.  'and he spoke to me,' she added, with a
perplexed countenance.

'what did he say?' asked hareton.

'he told me to begone as fast as i could,' she answered.  'but he looked
so different from his usual look that i stopped a moment to stare at
him.'

'how?' he inquired.

'why, almost bright and cheerful.  no, _almost_ nothing--_very much_
excited, and wild, and glad!' she replied.

'night-walking amuses him, then,' i remarked, affecting a careless
manner: in reality as surprised as
 
 ___________________________
 
 she was, and anxious to ascertain the
truth of her statement; for to see the master looking glad would not be
an every-day spectacle.  i framed an excuse to go in.  heathcliff stood
at the open door; he was pale, and he trembled: yet, certainly, he had a
strange joyful glitter in his eyes, that altered the aspect of his whole
face.

'will you have some breakfast?' i said.  'you must be hungry, rambling
about all night!'  i wanted to discover where he had been, but i did not
like to ask directly.

'no, i'm not hungry,' he answered, averting his head, and speaking rather
contemptuously, as if he guessed i was trying to divine the occasion of
his good humour.

i felt pe
 
 ___________________________
 
after an hour or two he
re-entered, when the room was clear, in no degree calmer: the same
unnatural--it was unnatural--appearance of joy under his black brows; the
same bloodless hue, and his teeth visible, now and then, in a kind of
smile; his frame shivering, not as one shivers with chill or weakness,
but as a tight-stretched cord vibrates--a strong thrilling, rather than
trembling.

i will ask what is the matter, i thought; or who should?  and i
exclaimed--'have you heard any good news, mr. heathcliff?  you look
uncommonly animated.'

'where should good news come from to me?' he said.  'i'm animated with
hunger; and, seemingly, i must not eat.'

'your dinner is here,' i returned; 'why won't you get it?'

'i don't want it now,' he muttered, hastily: 'i'll wait till supper.  and,
nelly, once for all, let me beg you to warn hareton and the other away
from me.  i wish to be troubled by nobody: i wish to have this place to
myself.'

'is there some new reason for this banishment?' i inquired.  'te
 
 ___________________________
 
ll me why
you are so queer, mr. heathcliff?  where were you last night?  i'm not
putting the question through idle curiosity, but--'

'you are putting the question through very idle curiosity,' he
interrupted, with a laugh.  'yet i'll answer it.  last night i was on the
threshold of hell.  to-day, i am within sight of my heaven.  i have my
eyes on it: hardly three feet to sever me!  and now you'd better go!
you'll neither see nor hear anything to frighten you, if you refrain from
prying.'

having swept the hearth and wiped the table, i 
 
 ___________________________
 
s, or through the large
stones which it could not cover.  i uttered an ejaculation of discontent
at seeing the dismal grate, and commenced shutting the casements, one
after another, till i came to his.

'must i close this?' i asked, in order to rouse him; for he would not
stir.

the light flashed on his features as i spoke.  oh, mr. lockwood, i cannot
express what a terrible start i got by the momentary view!  those deep
black eyes!  that smile, and ghastly paleness!  it appeared to me, not
mr. heathcliff, but a goblin; and, in my terror, i let the candle bend
towards the wall, and it left me in darkness.

'yes, close it,' he replied, in his familiar voice.  'there, that is pure
awkwardness!  why did you hold the candle horizontally?  be quick, and
bring another.'

i hurried out in a foolish state of dread, and said to joseph--'the
master wishes you to take him a light and rekindle the fire.'  for i
dared not go in myself again just then.

joseph rattled some fire into the shovel, and went: but 
 
 ___________________________
 
he brought it
back immediately, with the supper-tray in his other hand, explaining that
mr. heathcliff was going to bed, and he wanted nothing to eat till
morning.  we heard him mount the stairs directly; he did not proceed to
his ordinary chamber, but turned into that with the panelled bed: its
window, as i mentioned before, is wide enough for anybody to get through;
and it struck me that he plotted another midnight excursion, of which he
had rather we had no suspicion.

'is he a ghoul or a vampire?' i mused.  i had read of such hideous
incarnate demons.  and then i set myself to reflect how i 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd i began, half dreaming, to weary myself
with imagining some fit parentage for him; and, repeating my waking
meditations, i tracked his existence over again, with grim variations; at
last, picturing his death and funeral: of which, all i can remember is,
being exceedingly vexed at having the task of dictating an inscription
for his monument, and consulting the sexton about it; and, as he had no
surname, and we could not tell his age, we were obliged to content
ourselves with the single word, 'heathcliff.'  that came true: we were.
if you enter the kirkyard, you'll read, on his headstone, only that, and
the date of his death.

dawn restored me to common sense.  i rose, and went into the garden, as
soon as i could see, to ascertain if there were any footmarks under his
window.  there were none.  'he has stayed at home,' i thought, 'and he'll
be all right to-day.'  i prepared breakfast for the household, as was my
usual custom, but told hareton and catherine to get theirs ere the master
came down
 
 ___________________________
 
, for he lay late.  they preferred taking it out of doors, under
the trees, and i set a little table to accommodate them.

on my re-entrance, i found mr. heathcliff below.  he and joseph were
conversing about some farming business; he gave clear, minute directions
concerning the matter discussed, but he spoke rapidly, and turned his
head continually aside, and had the same excited expression, even more
exaggerated.  when joseph quitted the room he took his seat in the place
he generally chose, and i put a basin of coffee before him.  he drew it
nearer, and then rested his arms on the table, and looked at the opposite
wall, as i supposed, surveying one part
 
 ___________________________
 
icular portion, up and down, with
glittering, restless eyes, and with such eager interest that he stopped
breathing during half a minute together.

'come now,' i exclaimed, pushing some bread against his hand, 'eat and
drink that, while it is hot: it has been waiting near an hour.'

he didn't notice me, and yet he smiled.  i'd rather have seen him gnash
his teeth than smile so.

'mr. heathcliff! master!' i cried, 'don't, for god's sake, stare as if
you saw an unearthly vision.'

'don't, for god's sake, shout so loud,' he replied.  'turn round, and
tell me, are we by ourselves?'

'of course,' was my answer; 'of course we are.'

still, i involuntarily obeyed him, as if i was not quite sure.  with a
sweep of his hand he cleared a vacant space in front among the breakfast
things, and leant forward to gaze more at his ease.

now, i perceived he was not looking at the wall; for when i regar
 
 ___________________________
 
d these words he left the house, slowly
sauntered down the garden path, and disappeared through the gate.

the hours crept anxiously by: another evening came.  i did not retire to
rest till late, and when i did, i could not sleep.  he returned after
midnight, and, instead of going to bed, shut himself into the room
beneath.  i listened, and tossed about, and, finally, dressed and
descended.  it was too irksome to lie there, harassing my brain with a
hundred idle misgivings.

i distinguished mr. heathcliff's step, restlessly measuring the floor,
and he frequently broke the silence by a deep inspiration, resembling a
groan.  he muttered detached words also; the only one i could catch was
the name of catherine, coupled with some wild term of endearment or
suffering; and spoken as one would speak to a person present; low and
earnest, and wrung from the depth of his soul.  i had not courage to walk
straight into the apartment; but i desired to divert him from his
reverie, and therefore fell foul of t
 
 ___________________________
 
 roamed to and fro, meantime, in a state approaching distraction; his
heavy sighs succeeding each other so thick as to leave no space for
common breathing between.

'when day breaks i'll send for green,' he said; 'i wish to make some
legal inquiries of him while i can bestow a thought on those matters, and
while i can act calmly.  i have not written my will yet; and how to leave
my property i cannot determine.  i wish i could annihilate it from the
face of the earth.'

'i would not talk so, mr. heathcliff,' i interposed. 'let your will be a
while: you'll be spared to repent of your many injustices yet! i never
expected that your nerves would be disordered: they are, at present,
marvellously so, however; and almost entirely through your own fault.
the way you've passed these three last days might knock up a titan. do
take some food, and some repose. you need only look at yourself in a
glass to see how you require both. your cheeks are hollow, and your eyes
blood-shot, like a person starving with 
 
 ___________________________
 
n arms' length of the shore!  i must reach it first, and then
i'll rest.  well, never mind mr. green: as to repenting of my injustices,
i've done no injustice, and i repent of nothing.  i'm too happy; and yet
i'm not happy enough.  my soul's bliss kills my body, but does not
satisfy itself.'

'happy, master?' i cried.  'strange happiness!  if you would hear me
without being angry, i might offer some advice that would make you
happier.'

'what is that?' he asked.  'give it.'

'you are aware, mr. heathcliff,' i said, 'that from the time you were
thirteen years old you have lived a selfish, unchristian life; and
probably hardly had a bible in your hands during all that period.  you
must have forgotten the contents of the book, and you may not have space
to search it now.  could it be hurtful to send for some one--some
minister of any denomination, it does not matter which--to explain it,
and show you how very far you have erred from its precepts; and how unfit
you will be for its heaven, unless a c
 
 ___________________________
 
 shrink from my company!  by god! she's relentless.  oh, damn it!
it's unutterably too much for flesh and blood to bear--even mine.'

he solicited the society of no one more.  at dusk he went into his
chamber.  through the whole night, and far into the morning, we heard him
groaning and murmuring to himself.  hareton was anxious to enter; but i
bid him fetch mr. kenneth, and he should go in and see him.  when he
came, and i requested admittance and tried to open the door, i found it
locked; and heathcliff bid us be damned.  he was better, and would be
left alone; so the doctor went away.

the following evening was very wet: indeed, it poured down till day-dawn;
and, as i took my morning walk round the house, i observed the master's
window swinging open, and the rain driving straight in.  he cannot be in
bed, i thought: those showers would drench him through.  he must either
be up or out.  but i'll make no more ado, i'll go boldly and look.'

having succeeded in obtaining entrance with another ke
 
 ___________________________
 
y, i ran to unclose
the panels, for the chamber was vacant; quickly pushing them aside, i
peeped in.  mr. heathcliff was there--laid on his back.  his eyes met
mine so keen and fierce, i started; and then he seemed to smile.  i could
not think him dead: but his face and throat were washed with rain; the
bed-clothes dripped, and he was perfectly still.  the lattice, flapping
to and fro, had grazed one hand that rested on the sill; no blood
trickled from the broken skin, and when i put my fingers to it, i could
doubt no more: he was dead and stark!

i hasped the window; i combed his black long hair from his for
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
kitchen fire affirms he has seen two on 'em looking out of his chamber
window on every rainy night since his death:--and an odd thing happened
to me about a month ago.  i was going to the grange one evening--a dark
evening, threatening thunder--and, just at the turn of the heights, i
encountered a little boy with a sheep and two lambs before him; he was
crying terribly; and i supposed the lambs were skittish, and would not be
guided.

'what is the matter, my little man?' i asked.

'there's heathcliff and a woman yonder, under t' nab,' he blubbered, 'un'
i darnut pass 'em.'

i saw nothing; but neither the sheep nor he would go on so i bid him take
the road lower down.  he probably raised the phantoms from thinking, as
he traversed the moors alone, on the nonsense he had heard his parents
and companions repeat.  yet, still, i don't like being out in the dark
now; and i don't like being left by myself in this grim house: i cannot
help it; i shall be glad when they leave it, and shift to the gr
 
 ___________________________
 
sion in the direction of the kirk.
when beneath its walls, i perceived decay had made progress, even in
seven months: many a window showed black gaps deprived of glass; and
slates jutted off here and there, beyond the right line of the roof, to
be gradually worked off in coming autumn storms.

i sought, and soon discovered, the three headstones on the slope next the
moor: the middle one grey, and half buried in the heath; edgar linton's
only harmonized by the turf and moss creeping up its foot; heathcliff's
still bare.

i lingered round them, under that benign sky: watched the moths
fluttering among the heath and harebells, listened to the soft wind
breathing through the grass, and wondered how any one could ever imagine
unquiet slumbers for the sleepers in that quiet earth.
