ely removed from the stir of society.  a perfect
misanthropist's heaven: and mr. heathcliff and i are such a suitable pair
to divide the desolation between us.  a capital fellow!  he little
imagined how my heart warmed towards him when i beheld his black eyes
withdraw so suspiciously under their brows, as i rode up, and when his
fingers sheltered themselves, with a jealous resolution, still further in
his waistcoat, as i announced my name.

'mr. heathcliff?' i said.

a nod was the answer.

'mr. lockwood, your new tenant, sir.  i do myself the honour of calling
as soon as possible after my arrival, to express the hope that i have not
inconvenienced you by my perseverance in soliciting the occupation of
thrushcross grange: i heard yesterday you had had some thoughts--'

'thrushcross grange is my own, sir,' he interrupted, wincing.  'i should
not allow any one to inconvenience me, if i could hinder it--walk in!'

the 'walk in' was uttered with closed teeth, and expressed the sentiment,
'go to the
 
 ___________________________
 
 deuce:' even the gate over which he leant manifested no
sympathising movement to the words; and i think that circumstance
determined me to accept the invitation: i felt interested in a man who
seemed more exaggeratedly reserved than myself.

when he saw my horse's breast fairly pushing the barrier, he did put out
his hand to unchain it, and then sullenly preceded me up the causeway,
calling, as we entered the court,--'joseph, take mr. lockwood's horse;
and bring up some wine.'

'here we have the whole establishment of domestics, i suppose,' was the
reflection suggested by this compound order.  'no wonder the grass grows
up between the flags, and cattle are the only hedge-cutters.'

joseph was an elderly, nay, an old man: very old, perhaps, though hale
and sinewy.  'the lord help us!' he soliloquised in an undertone of
peevish displeasure, while relieving me of my horse: looking, meantime,
in my face so sourly that i charitably conjec
 
 ___________________________
 
se spirits in them than those animals of yours, sir.  you
might as well leave a stranger with a brood of tigers!'

'they won't meddle with persons who touch nothing,' he remarked, putting
the bottle before me, and restoring the displaced table.  'the dogs do
right to be vigilant.  take a glass of wine?'

'no, thank you.'

'not bitten, are you?'

'if i had been, i would have set my signet on the biter.'  heathcliff's
countenance relaxed into a grin.

'come, come,' he said, 'you are flurried, mr. lockwood.  here, take a
little wine.  guests are so exceedingly rare in this house that i and my
dogs, i am willing to own, hardly know how to receive them.  your health,
sir?'

i bowed and returned the pledge; beginning to perceive that it would be
foolish to sit sulking for the misbehaviour of a pack of curs; besides, i
felt loth to yield the fellow further amusement at my expense; since his
humour took that turn.  he--probably swayed by prudential consideration
of the folly of offending a good tenant
 
 ___________________________
 
 fingers, and his face as white as the wall
behind him.  the first creak of the oak startled him like an electric
shock: the light leaped from his hold to a distance of some feet, and his
agitation was so extreme, that he could hardly pick it up.

'it is only your guest, sir,' i called out, desirous to spare him the
humiliation of exposing his cowardice further.  'i had the misfortune to
scream in my sleep, owing to a frightful nightmare.  i'm sorry i
disturbed you.'

'oh, god confound you, mr. lockwood!  i wish you were at the--' commenced
my host, setting the candle on a chair, because he found it impossible to
hold it steady.  'and who showed you up into this room?' he continued,
crushing his nails into his palms, and grinding his teeth to subdue the
maxillary convulsions.  'who was it?  i've a good mind to turn them out
of the house this moment?'

'it was your servant zillah,' i replied, flinging myself on to the floor,
and rapidly resuming my garments.  'i should not care if you did, mr.

 
 ___________________________
 
sh an
excess of violent emotion.  not liking to show him that i had heard the
conflict, i continued my toilette rather noisily, looked at my watch, and
soliloquised on the length of the night: 'not three o'clock yet!  i could
have taken oath it had been six.  time stagnates here: we must surely
have retired to rest at eight!'

'always at nine in winter, and rise at four,' said my host, suppressing a
groan: and, as i fancied, by the motion of his arm's shadow, dashing a
tear from his eyes.  'mr. lockwood,' he added, 'you may go into my room:
you'll only be in the way, coming down-stairs so early: and your childish
outcry has sent sleep to the devil for me.'

'and for me, too,' i replied.  'i'll walk in the yard till daylight, and
then i'll be off; and you need not dread a repetition of my intrusion.
i'm now quite cured of seeking pleasure in society, be it country or
town.  a sensible man ought to find sufficient company in himself.'

'delightful company!' muttered heathcliff.  'take the candle
 
 ___________________________
 
t
so afraid of dying!  i imagined her as little likely to die as myself.
she was rather thin, but young, and fresh-complexioned, and her eyes
sparkled as bright as diamonds.  i did remark, to be sure, that mounting
the stairs made her breathe very quick; that the least sudden noise set
her all in a quiver, and that she coughed troublesomely sometimes: but i
knew nothing of what these symptoms portended, and had no impulse to
sympathise with her.  we don't in general take to foreigners here, mr.
lockwood, unless they take to us first.

young earnshaw was altered considerably in the three years of his
absence. he had grown sparer, and lost his colour, and spoke and dressed
quite differently; and, on the very day of his return, he told joseph
and me we must thenceforth quarter ourselves in the back-kitchen, and
leave the house for him. indeed, he would have carpeted and papered a
small spare room for a parlour; but his wife expressed such pleasure at
the white floor and huge glowing fireplace, at
 
 ___________________________
 
g the subject of his
thoughts, he answered gravely--'i'm trying to settle how i shall pay
hindley back. i don't care how long i wait, if i can only do it at last.
i hope he will not die before i do!'

'for shame, heathcliff!' said i.  'it is for god to punish wicked people;
we should learn to forgive.'

'no, god won't have the satisfaction that i shall,' he returned.  'i only
wish i knew the best way!  let me alone, and i'll plan it out: while i'm
thinking of that i don't feel pain.'

'but, mr. lockwood, i forget these tales cannot divert you.  i'm annoyed
how i should dream of chattering on at such a rate; and your gruel cold,
and you nodding for bed!  i could have told heathcliff's history, all
that you need hear, in half a dozen words.'

* * * * *

thus interrupting herself, the housekeeper rose, and proceeded to lay
aside her sewing; but i felt incapable of moving from the hearth, and i
was very far from nodding.  'sit still, mrs. dean,' i cried; 'do sit
still another half-hour.  you've do
 
 ___________________________
 
ity of servants think.  you have been compelled
to cultivate your reflective faculties for want of occasions for
frittering your life away in silly trifles.'

mrs. dean laughed.

'i certainly esteem myself a steady, reasonable kind of body,' she said;
'not exactly from living among the hills and seeing one set of faces, and
one series of actions, from year's end to year's end; but i have
undergone sharp discipline, which has taught me wisdom; and then, i have
read more than you would fancy, mr. lockwood.  you could not open a book
in this library that i have not looked into, and got something out of
also: unless it be that range of greek and latin, and that of french; and
those i know one from another: it is as much as you can expect of a poor
man's daughter.  however, if i am to follow my story in true gossip's
fashion, i had better go on; and instead of leaping three years, i will
be content to pass to the next summer--the summer of 1778, that is nearly
twenty-three years ago.'




chapter v
 
 ___________________________
 
ur fingers from that bitter phalanx of vials.  draw your knitting
out of your pocket--that will do--now continue the history of mr.
heathcliff, from where you left off, to the present day.  did he finish
his education on the continent, and come back a gentleman? or did he get
a sizar's place at college, or escape to america, and earn honours by
drawing blood from his foster-country? or make a fortune more promptly on
the english highways?'

'he may have done a little in all these vocations, mr. lockwood; but i
couldn't give my word for any.  i stated before that i didn't know how he
gained his money; neither am i aware of the means he took to raise his
mind from the savage ignorance into which it was sunk: but, with your
leave, i'll proceed in my own fashion, if you think it will amuse and not
weary you.  are you feeling better this morning?'

'much.'

'that's good news.'

* * * * *

i got miss catherine and myself to thrushcross grange; and, to my
agreeable disappointment, she behaved infinit
 
 ___________________________
 
manity_!  from _pity_ and _charity_!  he might as well
plant an oak in a flower-pot, and expect it to thrive, as imagine he can
restore her to vigour in the soil of his shallow cares?  let us settle it
at once: will you stay here, and am i to fight my way to catherine over
linton and his footman?  or will you be my friend, as you have been
hitherto, and do what i request?  decide! because there is no reason for
my lingering another minute, if you persist in your stubborn ill-nature!'

well, mr. lockwood, i argued and complained, and flatly refused him fifty
times; but in the long run he forced me to an agreement.  i engaged to
carry a letter from him to my mistress; and should she consent, i
promised to let him have intelligence of linton's next absence from home,
when he might come, and get in as he was able: i wouldn't be there, and
my fellow-servants should be equally out of the way.  was it right or
wrong?  i fear it was wrong, though expedient.  i thought i prevented
another explosion by 
 
 ___________________________
 
own himself sadly the
worse and the weaker man.  when his ship struck, the captain abandoned
his post; and the crew, instead of trying to save her, rushed into riot
and confusion, leaving no hope for their luckless vessel.  linton, on the
contrary, displayed the true courage of a loyal and faithful soul: he
trusted god; and god comforted him.  one hoped, and the other despaired:
they chose their own lots, and were righteously doomed to endure them.
but you'll not want to hear my moralising, mr. lockwood; you'll judge, as
well as i can, all these things: at least, you'll think you will, and
that's the same.  the end of earnshaw was what might have been expected;
it followed fast on his sister's: there were scarcely six months between
them.  we, at the grange, never got a very succinct account of his state
preceding it; all that i did learn was on occasion of going to aid in the
preparations for the funeral.  mr. kenneth came to announce the event to
my master.

'well, nelly,' said he, riding in
 
 ___________________________
 
ff.  she stared, but soon
comprehending why i counselled her to utter the falsehood, she assured me
she would not complain.

i couldn't abide to be present at their meeting.  i stood outside the
chamber-door a quarter of an hour, and hardly ventured near the bed,
then.  all was composed, however: catherine's despair was as silent as
her father's joy.  she supported him calmly, in appearance; and he fixed
on her features his raised eyes that seemed dilating with ecstasy.

he died blissfully, mr. lockwood: he died so.  kissing her cheek, he
murmured,--'i am going to her; and you, darling child, shall come to us!'
and never stirred or spoke again; but continued that rapt, radiant gaze,
till his pulse imperceptibly stopped and his soul departed.  none could
have noticed the exact minute of his death, it was so entirely without a
struggle.

whether catherine had spent her tears, or whether the grief were too
weighty to let them flow, she sat there dry-eyed till the sun rose: she
sat till noon, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ind him.  'but when i look for his father in his face, i find _her_
every day more!  how the devil is he so like?  i can hardly bear to see
him.'

he bent his eyes to the ground, and walked moodily in.  there was a
restless, anxious expression in his countenance.  i had never remarked
there before; and he looked sparer in person.  his daughter-in-law, on
perceiving him through the window, immediately escaped to the kitchen, so
that i remained alone.

'i'm glad to see you out of doors again, mr. lockwood,' he said, in reply
to my greeting; 'from selfish motives partly: i don't think i could
readily supply your loss in this desolation.  i've wondered more than
once what brought you here.'

'an idle whim, i fear, sir,' was my answer; 'or else an idle whim is
going to spirit me away.  i shall set out for london next week; and i
must give you warning that i feel no disposition to retain thrushcross
grange beyond the twelve months i agreed to rent it.  i believe i shall
not live there any more.'

'o
 
 ___________________________
 
e back premises, i judged, by one thin, blue
wreath, curling from the kitchen chimney, and they did not hear.  i rode
into the court.  under the porch, a girl of nine or ten sat knitting, and
an old woman reclined on the housesteps, smoking a meditative pipe.

'is mrs. dean within?' i demanded of the dame.

'mistress dean?  nay!' she answered, 'she doesn't bide here: shoo's up at
th' heights.'

'are you the housekeeper, then?' i continued.

'eea, aw keep th' hause,' she replied.

'well, i'm mr. lockwood, the master.  are there any rooms to lodge me in,
i wonder?  i wish to stay all night.'

't' maister!' she cried in astonishment.  'whet, whoiver knew yah wur
coming?  yah sud ha' send word.  they's nowt norther dry nor mensful
abaht t' place: nowt there isn't!'

she threw down her pipe and bustled in, the girl followed, and i entered
too; soon perceiving that her report was true, and, moreover, that i had
almost upset her wits by my unwelcome apparition, i bade her be composed.
i would go out 
 
 ___________________________
 
 he added, with a groan; 'he's witched: i'm sartin
on't.  oh, lord, judge 'em, for there's norther law nor justice among wer
rullers!'

'no! or we should be sitting in flaming fagots, i suppose,' retorted the
singer.  'but wisht, old man, and read your bible like a christian, and
never mind me.  this is "fairy annie's wedding"--a bonny tune--it goes to
a dance.'

mrs. dean was about to recommence, when i advanced; and recognising me
directly, she jumped to her feet, crying--'why, bless you, mr. lockwood!
how could you think of returning in this way?  all's shut up at
thrushcross grange.  you should have given us notice!'

'i've arranged to be accommodated there, for as long as i shall stay,' i
answered.  'i depart again to-morrow.  and how are you transplanted here,
mrs. dean? tell me that.'

'zillah left, and mr. heathcliff wished me to come, soon after you went
to london, and stay till you returned.  but, step in, pray! have you
walked from gimmerton this evening?'

'from the grange,' i repl
 
 ___________________________
 

to say, than ever she had been under that roof before; except, perhaps,
during her earliest visits to linton.

the intimacy thus commenced grew rapidly; though it encountered temporary
interruptions.  earnshaw was not to be civilized with a wish, and my
young lady was no philosopher, and no paragon of patience; but both their
minds tending to the same point--one loving and desiring to esteem, and
the other loving and desiring to be esteemed--they contrived in the end
to reach it.

you see, mr. lockwood, it was easy enough to win mrs. heathcliff's heart.
but now, i'm glad you did not try.  the crown of all my wishes will be
the union of those two.  i shall envy no one on their wedding day: there
won't be a happier woman than myself in england!




chapter xxxiii


on the morrow of that monday, earnshaw being still unable to follow his
ordinary employments, and therefore remaining about the house, i speedily
found it would be impracticable to retain my charge beside me, as
heretofore.  she got 
 
 ___________________________
 
 long fight; i wish it were over!'

he began to pace the room, muttering terrible things to himself, till i
was inclined to believe, as he said joseph did, that conscience had
turned his heart to an earthly hell.  i wondered greatly how it would
end.  though he seldom before had revealed this state of mind, even by
looks, it was his habitual mood, i had no doubt: he asserted it himself;
but not a soul, from his general bearing, would have conjectured the
fact.  you did not when you saw him, mr. lockwood: and at the period of
which i speak, he was just the same as then; only fonder of continued
solitude, and perhaps still more laconic in company.




chapter xxxiv


for some days after that evening mr. heathcliff shunned meeting us at
meals; yet he would not consent formally to exclude hareton and cathy.  he
had an aversion to yielding so completely to his feelings, choosing
rather to absent himself; and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed
sufficient sustenance for him.

one night, after th
 
 ___________________________
 
ld air of the cloudy evening; and so still,
that not only the murmur of the beck down gimmerton was distinguishable,
but its ripples and its gurgling over the pebbles, or through the large
stones which it could not cover.  i uttered an ejaculation of discontent
at seeing the dismal grate, and commenced shutting the casements, one
after another, till i came to his.

'must i close this?' i asked, in order to rouse him; for he would not
stir.

the light flashed on his features as i spoke.  oh, mr. lockwood, i cannot
express what a terrible start i got by the momentary view!  those deep
black eyes!  that smile, and ghastly paleness!  it appeared to me, not
mr. heathcliff, but a goblin; and, in my terror, i let the candle bend
towards the wall, and it left me in darkness.

'yes, close it,' he replied, in his familiar voice.  'there, that is pure
awkwardness!  why did you hold the candle horizontally?  be quick, and
bring another.'

i hurried out in a foolish state of dread, and said to joseph--'the
 
 ___________________________
 
lf in this grim house: i cannot
help it; i shall be glad when they leave it, and shift to the grange.

'they are going to the grange, then?' i said.

'yes,' answered mrs. dean, 'as soon as they are married, and that will be
on new year's day.'

'and who will live here then?'

'why, joseph will take care of the house, and, perhaps, a lad to keep him
company.  they will live in the kitchen, and the rest will be shut up.'

'for the use of such ghosts as choose to inhabit it?' i observed.

'no, mr. lockwood,' said nelly, shaking her head.  'i believe the dead
are at peace: but it is not right to speak of them with levity.'

at that moment the garden gate swung to; the ramblers were returning.

'_they_ are afraid of nothing,' i grumbled, watching their approach
through the window.  'together, they would brave satan and all his
legions.'

as they stepped on to the door-stones, and halted to take a last look at
the moon--or, more correctly, at each other by her light--i felt
irresistibly impelled to 