ll stretching their limbs one way, as if craving alms of the sun.
happily, the architect had foresight to build it strong: the narrow
windows are deeply set in the wall, and the corners defended with large
jutting stones.

before passing the threshold, i paused to admire a quantity of grotesque
carving lavished over the front, and especially about the principal door;
above which, among a wilderness of crumbling griffins and shameless
little boys, i detected the date '1500,' and the name 'hareton earnshaw.'
i would have made a few comments, and requested a short history of the
place from the surly owner; but his attitude at the door appeared to
demand my speedy entrance, or complete departure, and i had no desire to
aggravate his impatience previous to inspecting the penetralium.

one stop brought us into the family sitting-room, without any
introductory lobby or passage: they call it here 'the house'
pre-eminently.  it includes kitchen and parlour, generally; but i believe
at wuthering heights 
 
 ___________________________
 
hered the storm in a brutal curse,
muttered on my behalf: which, however, i took care not to notice.

'unhappy in your conjectures, sir,' observed my host; 'we neither of us
have the privilege of owning your good fairy; her mate is dead.  i said
she was my daughter-in-law: therefore, she must have married my son.'

'and this young man is--'

'not my son, assuredly.'

heathcliff smiled again, as if it were rather too bold a jest to
attribute the paternity of that bear to him.

'my name is hareton earnshaw,' growled the other; 'and i'd counsel you to
respect it!'

'i've shown no disrespect,' was my reply, laughing internally at the
dignity with which he announced himself.

he fixed his eye on me longer than i cared to return the stare, for fear
i might be tempted either to box his ears or render my hilarity audible.
i began to feel unmistakably out of place in that pleasant family circle.
the dismal spiritual atmosphere overcame, and more than neutralised, the
glowing physical comforts round me; 
 
 ___________________________
 
but as sound as i can give.'

'then, if you hear of me being discovered dead in a bog or a pit full of
snow, your conscience won't whisper that it is partly your fault?'

'how so?  i cannot escort you.  they wouldn't let me go to the end of the
garden wall.'

'_you_!  i should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold, for my
convenience, on such a night,' i cried.  'i want you to tell me my way,
not to _show_ it: or else to persuade mr. heathcliff to give me a guide.'

'who?  there is himself, earnshaw, zillah, joseph and i.  which would you
have?'

'are there no boys at the farm?'

'no; those are all.'

'then, it follows that i am compelled to stay.'

'that you may settle with your host.  i have nothing to do with it.'

'i hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more rash journeys on these
hills,' cried heathcliff's stern voice from the kitchen entrance.  'as to
staying here, i don't keep accommodations for visitors: you must share a
bed with hareton or joseph, if you do.'

'i can sleep o
 
 ___________________________
 
n a chair in this room,' i replied.

'no, no!  a stranger is a stranger, be he rich or poor: it will not suit
me to permit any one the range of the place while i am off guard!' said
the unmannerly wretch.

with this insult my patience was at an end.  i uttered an expression of
disgust, and pushed past him into the yard, running against earnshaw in
my haste.  it was so dark that i could not see the means of exit; and, as
i wandered round, i heard another specimen of their civil behaviour
amongst each other.  at first the young man appeared about to befriend
me.

'i'll go with him as far as the park,' he said.

'you'll go with him to hell!' exclaimed his master, or whatever relation
he bore.  'and who is to look after the horses, eh?'

'a man's life is of more consequence than one evening's neglect of the
horses: somebody must go,' murm
 
 ___________________________
 
d still heathcliff laughed, and still i scolded.  i don't know what
would have concluded the scene, had there not been one person at hand
rather more rational than myself, and more benevolent than my
entertainer.  this was zillah, the stout housewife; who at length issued
forth to inquire into the nature of the uproar.  she thought that some of
them had been laying violent hands on me; and, not daring to attack her
master, she turned her vocal artillery against the younger scoundrel.

'well, mr. earnshaw,' she cried, 'i wonder what you'll have agait next?
are we going to murder folk on our very door-stones?  i see this house
will never do for me--look at t' poor lad, he's fair choking!  wisht,
wisht; you mun'n't go on so.  come in, and i'll cure that: there now,
hold ye still.'

with these words she suddenly splashed a pint of icy water down my neck,
and pulled me into the kitchen.  mr. heathcliff followed, his accidental
merriment expiring quickly in his habitual moroseness.

i was sick exceed
 
 ___________________________
 
 formed a little closet, and
the ledge of a window, which it enclosed, served as a table.  i slid back
the panelled sides, got in with my light, pulled them together again, and
felt secure against the vigilance of heathcliff, and every one else.

the ledge, where i placed my candle, had a few mildewed books piled up in
one corner; and it was covered with writing scratched on the paint.  this
writing, however, was nothing but a name repeated in all kinds of
characters, large and small--_catherine earnshaw_, here and there varied
to _catherine heathcliff_, and then again to _catherine linton_.

in vapid listlessness i leant my head against the window, and continued
spelling over catherine earnshaw--heathcliff--linton, till my eyes
closed; but they had not rested five minutes when a glare of white
letters started from the dark, as vivid as spectres--the air swarmed with
catherines; and rousing myself to dispel the obtrusive name, i discovered
my candle-wick reclining on one of the antique volumes,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and perfuming the
place with an odour of roasted calf-skin.  i snuffed it off, and, very
ill at ease under the influence of cold and lingering nausea, sat up and
spread open the injured tome on my knee.  it was a testament, in lean
type, and smelling dreadfully musty: a fly-leaf bore the
inscription--'catherine earnshaw, her book,' and a date some quarter of a
century back.  i shut it, and took up another and another, till i had
examined all.  catherine's library was select, and its state of
dilapidation proved it to have been well used, though not altogether for
a legitimate purpose: scarcely one chapter had escaped, a pen-and-ink
commentary--at least the appearance of one--covering every morsel of
blank that the printer had left.  some were detached sentences; other
parts took the form of a regular diary, sc
 
 ___________________________
 
e-inch pipe with tobacco.  my presence in
his sanctum was evidently esteemed a piece of impudence too shameful for
remark: he silently applied the tube to his lips, folded his arms, and
puffed away.  i let him enjoy the luxury unannoyed; and after sucking out
his last wreath, and heaving a profound sigh, he got up, and departed as
solemnly as he came.

a more elastic footstep entered next; and now i opened my mouth for a
'good-morning,' but closed it again, the salutation unachieved; for
hareton earnshaw was performing his orison _sotto voce_, in a series of
curses directed against every object he touched, while he rummaged a
corner for a spade or shovel to dig through the drifts.  he glanced over
the back of the bench, dilating his nostrils, and thought as little of
exchanging civilities with me as with my companion the cat.  i guessed,
by his preparations, that egress was allowed, and, leaving my hard couch,
made a movement to follow him.  he noticed this, and thrust at an inner
door with the
 
 ___________________________
 
 lady, mrs. heathcliff, is his widow?'

'yes.'

'where did she come from originally?'

'why, sir, she is my late master's daughter: catherine linton was her
maiden name.  i nursed her, poor thing!  i did wish mr. heathcliff would
remove here, and then we might have been together again.'

'what!  catherine linton?' i exclaimed, astonished.  but a minute's
reflection convinced me it was not my ghostly catherine.  'then,' i
continued, 'my predecessor's name was linton?'

'it was.'

'and who is that earnshaw: hareton earnshaw, who lives with mr.
heathcliff?  are they relations?'

'no; he is the late mrs. linton's nephew.'

'the young lady's cousin, then?'

'yes; and her husband was her cousin also: one on the mother's, the other
on the father's side: heathcliff married mr. linton's sister.'

'i see the house at wuthering heights has "earnshaw" carved over the
front door.  are they an old family?'

'very old, sir; and hareton is the last of them, as our miss cathy is of
us--i mean, of the lintons.  
 
 ___________________________
 
d brain.  this caused me to
feel, not uncomfortable, but rather fearful (as i am still) of serious
effects from the incidents of to-day and yesterday.  she returned
presently, bringing a smoking basin and a basket of work; and, having
placed the former on the hob, drew in her seat, evidently pleased to find
me so companionable.

before i came to live here, she commenced--waiting no farther invitation
to her story--i was almost always at wuthering heights; because my mother
had nursed mr. hindley earnshaw, that was hareton's father, and i got
used to playing with the children: i ran errands too, and helped to make
hay, and hung about the farm ready for anything that anybody would set me
to.  one fine summer morning--it was the beginning of harvest, i
remember--mr. earnshaw, the old master, came down-stairs, dressed for a
journey; and, after he had told joseph what was to be done during the
day, he turned to hindley, and cathy, and me--for i sat eating my
porridge with them--and he said, speaking
 
 ___________________________
 
is a long spell!'  hindley named a fiddle, and
then he asked miss cathy; she was hardly six years old, but she could
ride any horse in the stable, and she chose a whip.  he did not forget
me; for he had a kind heart, though he was rather severe sometimes.  he
promised to bring me a pocketful of apples and pears, and then he kissed
his children, said good-bye, and set off.

it seemed a long while to us all--the three days of his absence--and
often did little cathy ask when he would be home.  mrs. earnshaw expected
him by supper-time on the third evening, and she put the meal off hour
after hour; there were no signs of his coming, however, and at last the
children got tired of running down to the gate to look.  then it grew
dark; she would have had them to bed, but they begged sadly to be allowed
to stay up; and, just about eleven o'clock, the door-latch was raised
quietly, and in stepped the master.  he threw himself into a chair,
laughing and groaning, and bid them all stand off, for he was nea
 
 ___________________________
 
, wife!  i
was never so beaten with anything in my life: but you must e'en take it
as a gift of god; though it's as dark almost as if it came from the
devil.'

we crowded round, and over miss cathy's head i had a peep at a dirty,
ragged, black-haired child; big enough both to walk and talk: indeed, its
face looked older than catherine's; yet when it was set on its feet, it
only stared round, and repeated over and over again some gibberish that
nobody could understand.  i was frightened, and mrs. earnshaw was ready
to fling it out of doors: she did fly up, asking how he could fashion to
bring that gipsy brat into the house, when they had their own bairns to
feed and fend for?  what he meant to do with it, and whether he were mad?
the master tried to explain the matter; but he was really half dead with
fatigue, and all that i could make out, amongst her scolding, was a tale
of his seeing it starving, and houseless, and as good as dumb, in the
streets of liverpool, where he picked it up and inquir
 
 ___________________________
 
ed for its owner.
not a soul knew to whom it belonged, he said; and his money and time
being both limited, he thought it better to take it home with him at
once, than run into vain expenses there: because he was determined he
would not leave it as he found it.  well, the conclusion was, that my
mistress grumbled herself calm; and mr. earnshaw told me to wash it, and
give it clean things, and let it sleep with the children.

hindley and cathy contented themselves with looking and listening till
peace was restored: then, both began searching their father's pockets
for the presents he had promised them. the former was a boy of fourteen,
but when he drew out what had been a fiddle, crushed to morsels in the
great-coat, he blubbered aloud; and cathy, when she learned the master
had lost her whip in attending on the stranger, showed her h
 
 ___________________________
 
umour by
grinning and spitting at the stupid little thing; earning for her pains
a sound blow from her father, to teach her cleaner manners. they
entirely refused to have it in bed with them, or even in their room; and
i had no more sense, so i put it on the landing of the stairs, hoping it
might be gone on the morrow. by chance, or else attracted by hearing his
voice, it crept to mr. earnshaw's door, and there he found it on
quitting his chamber. inquiries were made as to how it got there; i was
obliged to confess, and in recompense for my cowardice and inhumanity
was sent out of the house.

this was heathcliff's first introduction to the family.  on coming back a
few days afterwards (for i did not consider my banishment perpetual), i
found they had christened him 'heathcliff': it was the name of a son who
died in childhood, and it has served him ever since, both for christian
and s
 
 ___________________________
 
he truth i did the same; and we plagued and went on with
him shamefully: for i wasn't reasonable enough to feel my injustice, and
the mistress never put in a word on his behalf when she saw him wronged.

he seemed a sullen, patient child; hardened, perhaps, to ill-treatment:
he would stand hindley's blows without winking or shedding a tear, and my
pinches moved him only to draw in a breath and open his eyes, as if he
had hurt himself by accident, and nobody was to blame.  this endurance
made old earnshaw furious, when he discovered his son persecuting the
poor fatherless child, as he called him.  he took to heathcliff
strangely, believing all he said (for that matter, he said precious
little, and generally the truth), and petting him up far above cathy, who
was too mischievous and wayward for a favourite.

so, from the very beginning, he bred bad feeling in the house; and at
mrs. earnshaw's death, which happened in less than two years after, the
young master had learned to regard his father as 
 
 ___________________________
 
ose means i earned them, and thus hindley
lost his last ally: still i couldn't dote on heathcliff, and i wondered
often what my master saw to admire so much in the sullen boy; who never,
to my recollection, repaid his indulgence by any sign of gratitude.  he
was not insolent to his benefactor, he was simply insensible; though
knowing perfectly the hold he had on his heart, and conscious he had only
to speak and all the house would be obliged to bend to his wishes.  as an
instance, i remember mr. earnshaw once bought a couple of colts at the
parish fair, and gave the lads each one.  heathcliff took the handsomest,
but it soon fell lame, and when he discovered it, he said to hindley--

'you must exchange horses with me: i don't like mine; and if you won't i
shall tell your father of the three thrashings you've given me this week,
and show him my arm, which is black to the shoulder.'  hindley put out
his tongue, and cuffed him over the ears.  'you'd better do it at once,'
he persisted, escaping to
 
 ___________________________
 
hrow it,' he replied,
standing still, 'and then i'll tell how you boasted that you would turn
me out of doors as soon as he died, and see whether he will not turn you
out directly.'  hindley threw it, hitting him on the breast, and down he
fell, but staggered up immediately, breathless and white; and, had not i
prevented it, he would have gone just so to the master, and got full
revenge by letting his condition plead for him, intimating who had caused
it.  'take my colt, gipsy, then!' said young earnshaw.  'and i pray that
he may break your neck: take him, and be damned, you beggarly interloper!
and wheedle my father out of all he has: only afterwards show him what
you are, imp of satan.--and take that, i hope he'll kick out your
brains!'

heathcliff had gone to loose the beast, and shift it to his own stall; he
was passing behind it, when hindley finished his speech by knocking him
under its feet, and without stopping to examine whether his hopes were
fulfilled, ran away as fast as he could.  
 
 ___________________________
 
h his intention;
exchanging saddles and all, and then sitting down on a bundle of hay to
overcome the qualm which the violent blow occasioned, before he entered
the house.  i persuaded him easily to let me lay the blame of his bruises
on the horse: he minded little what tale was told since he had what he
wanted.  he complained so seldom, indeed, of such stirs as these, that i
really thought him not vindictive: i was deceived completely, as you will
hear.




chapter v


in the course of time mr. earnshaw began to fail. he had been active and
healthy, yet his strength left him suddenly; and when he was confined to
the chimney-corner he grew grievously irritable. a nothing vexed him;
and suspected slights of his authority nearly threw him into fits. this
was especially to be remarked if any one attempted to impose upon, or
domineer over, his favourite: he was painfully jealous lest a word
should be spoken amiss to him; seeming to have got into his head the
notion that, because he liked heathcliff
 
 ___________________________
 
for the kinder among
us did not wish to fret the master, so we humoured his partiality; and
that humouring was rich nourishment to the child's pride and black
tempers. still it became in a manner necessary; twice, or thrice,
hindley's manifestation of scorn, while his father was near, roused the
old man to a fury: he seized his stick to strike him, and shook with
rage that he could not do it.

at last, our curate (we had a curate then who made the living answer by
teaching the little lintons and earnshaws, and farming his bit of land
himself) advised that the young man should be sent to college; and mr.
earnshaw agreed, though with a heavy spirit, for he said--'hindley was
nought, and would never thrive as where he wandered.'

i hoped heartily we should have peace now.  it hurt me to think the
master should be made uncomfortable by his own good deed.  i fancied the
discontent of age and disease arose from his family disagreements; as he
would have it that it did: really, you know, sir, it was i
 
 ___________________________
 
fling the curses to his neighbours.  by his knack of sermonising and
pious discoursing, he contrived to make a great impression on mr.
earnshaw; and the more feeble the master became, the more influence he
gained.  he was relentless in worrying him about his soul's concerns, and
about ruling his children rigidly.  he encouraged him to regard hindley
as a reprobate; and, night after night, he regularly grumbled out a long
string of tales against heathcliff and catherine: always minding to
flatter earnshaw's weakness by heaping the heaviest blame on the latter.

certainly she had ways with her such as i never saw a child take up
before; and she put all of us past our patience fifty times and oftener
in a day: from the hour she came down-stairs till the hour she went to
bed, we had not a minute's security that she wouldn't be in mischief.  her
spirits were always at high-water mark, her tongue always going--singing,
laughing, and plaguing everybody who would not do the same.  a wild,
wicked slip s
 
 ___________________________
 
t, it seldom happened
that she would not keep you company, and oblige you to be quiet that you
might comfort her.  she was much too fond of heathcliff.  the greatest
punishment we could invent for her was to keep her separate from him: yet
she got chided more than any of us on his account.  in play, she liked
exceedingly to act the little mistress; using her hands freely, and
commanding her companions: she did so to me, but i would not bear
slapping and ordering; and so i let her know.

now, mr. earnshaw did not understand jokes from his children: he had
always been strict and grave with them; and catherine, on her part, had
no idea why her father should be crosser and less patient in his ailing
condition than he was in his prime.  his peevish reproofs wakened in her
a naughty delight to provoke him: she was never so happy as when we were
all scolding her at once, and she defying us with her bold, saucy look,
and her ready words; turning joseph's religious curses into ridicule,
baiting me, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
as badly as possible all day, she sometimes came fondling to
make it up at night.  'nay, cathy,' the old man would say, 'i cannot love
thee, thou'rt worse than thy brother.  go, say thy prayers, child, and
ask god's pardon.  i doubt thy mother and i must rue that we ever reared
thee!'  that made her cry, at first; and then being repulsed continually
hardened her, and she laughed if i told her to say she was sorry for her
faults, and beg to be forgiven.

but the hour came, at last, that ended mr. earnshaw's troubles on earth.
he died quietly in his chair one october evening, seated by the
fire-side.  a high wind blustered round the house, and roared in the
chimney: it sounded wild and stormy, yet it was not cold, and we were all
together--i, a little removed from the hearth, busy at my knitting, and
joseph reading his bible near the table (for the servants generally sat
in the house then, after their work was done).  miss cathy had been sick,
and that made her still; she leant against her father
 
 ___________________________
 
e likely to die as myself.
she was rather thin, but young, and fresh-complexioned, and her eyes
sparkled as bright as diamonds.  i did remark, to be sure, that mounting
the stairs made her breathe very quick; that the least sudden noise set
her all in a quiver, and that she coughed troublesomely sometimes: but i
knew nothing of what these symptoms portended, and had no impulse to
sympathise with her.  we don't in general take to foreigners here, mr.
lockwood, unless they take to us first.

young earnshaw was altered considerably in the three years of his
absence. he had grown sparer, and lost his colour, and spoke and dressed
quite differently; and, on the very day of his return, he told joseph
and me we must thenceforth quarter ourselves in the back-kitchen, and
leave the house for him. indeed, he would have carpeted and papered a
small spare room for a parlour; but his wife expressed such pleasure at
the white floor and huge glowing fireplace, at the pewter dishes and
delf-case, and dog-kenne
 
 ___________________________
 
isible:
and, at last, hindley in a passion told us to bolt the doors, and swore
nobody should let them in that night.  the household went to bed; and i,
too, anxious to lie down, opened my lattice and put my head out to
hearken, though it rained: determined to admit them in spite of the
prohibition, should they return.  in a while, i distinguished steps
coming up the road, and the light of a lantern glimmered through the
gate.  i threw a shawl over my head and ran to prevent them from waking
mr. earnshaw by knocking.  there was heathcliff, by himself: it gave me a
start to see him alone.

'where is miss catherine?' i cried hurriedly. 'no accident, i hope?' 'at
thrushcross grange,' he answered; 'and i would have been there too, but
they had not the manners to ask me to stay.' 'well, you will catch it!'
i said: 'you'll never be content till you're sent about your business.
what in the world led you wandering to thrushcross grange?' 'let me get
off my wet clothes, and i'll tell you all about it, n
 
 ___________________________
 
on her nose and raised
her hands in horror. the cowardly children crept nearer also, isabella
lisping--"frightful thing! put him in the cellar, papa. he's exactly
like the son of the fortune-teller that stole my tame pheasant. isn't
he, edgar?"

'while they examined me, cathy came round; she heard the last speech, and
laughed.  edgar linton, after an inquisitive stare, collected sufficient
wit to recognise her.  they see us at church, you know, though we seldom
meet them elsewhere.  "that's miss earnshaw?" he whispered to his mother,
"and look how skulker has bitten her--how her foot bleeds!"

'"miss earnshaw?  nonsense!" cried the dame; "miss earnshaw scouring the
country with a gipsy!  and yet, my dear, the child is in mourning--surely
it is--and she may be lamed for life!"

'"what culpable carelessness in her brother!" exclaimed mr. linton,
turning from me to catherine.  "i've understood from shielders"' (that
was the curate, sir) '"that he lets her grow up in absolute heathenism.
but who is
 
 ___________________________
 
ion my late neighbour made, in his journey to
liverpool--a little lascar, or an american or spanish castaway."

'"a wicked boy, at all events," remarked the old lady, "and quite unfit
for a decent house!  did you notice his language, linton?  i'm shocked
that my children should have heard it."

'i recommenced cursing--don't be angry, nelly--and so robert was ordered
to take me off.  i refused to go without cathy; he dragged me into the
garden, pushed the lantern into my hand, assured me that mr. earnshaw
should be informed of my behaviour, and, bidding me march directly,
secured the door again.  the curtains were still looped up at one corner,
and i resumed my station as spy; because, if catherine had wished to
return, i intended shattering their great glass panes to a million of
fragments, unless they let her out.  she sat on the sofa quietly.  mrs.
linton took off the grey cloak of the dairy-maid which we had borrowed
for our excursion, shaking her head and expostulating with her, i
suppose: 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the vacant blue eyes of the lintons--a dim reflection from
her own enchanting face.  i saw they were full of stupid admiration; she
is so immeasurably superior to them--to everybody on earth, is she not,
nelly?'

'there will more come of this business than you reckon on,' i answered,
covering him up and extinguishing the light.  'you are incurable,
heathcliff; and mr. hindley will have to proceed to extremities, see if
he won't.'  my words came truer than i desired.  the luckless adventure
made earnshaw furious.  and then mr. linton, to mend matters, paid us a
visit himself on the morrow, and read the young master such a lecture on
the road he guided his family, that he was stirred to look about him, in
earnest.  heathcliff received no flogging, but he was told that the first
word he spoke to miss catherine should ensure a dismissal; and mrs.
earnshaw undertook to keep her sister-in-law in due restraint when she
returned home; employing art, not force: with force she would have found
it imposs
 
 ___________________________
 
you
will disarrange your curls--let me untie your hat.'

i removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath a grand plaid silk
frock, white trousers, and burnished shoes; and, while her eyes sparkled
joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to welcome her, she dared hardly
touch them lest they should fawn upon her splendid garments.  she kissed
me gently: i was all flour making the christmas cake, and it would not
have done to give me a hug; and then she looked round for heathcliff.  mr.
and mrs. earnshaw watched anxiously their meeting; thinking it would
enable them to judge, in some measure, what grounds they had for hoping
to succeed in separating the two friends.

heathcliff was hard to discover, at first.  if he were careless, and
uncared for, before catherine's absence, he had been ten times more so
since.  nobody but i even did him the kindness to call him a dirty boy,
and bid him wash himself, once a week; and children of his age seldom
have a natural pleasure in soap and water.  therefo
 
 ___________________________
 
cealment, flew to
embrace him; she bestowed seven or eight kisses on his cheek within the
second, and then stopped, and drawing back, burst into a laugh,
exclaiming, 'why, how very black and cross you look! and how--how funny
and grim!  but that's because i'm used to edgar and isabella linton.
well, heathcliff, have you forgotten me?'

she had some reason to put the question, for shame and pride threw double
gloom over his countenance, and kept him immovable.

'shake hands, heathcliff,' said mr. earnshaw, condescendingly; 'once in a
way that is permitted.'

'i shall not,' replied the boy, finding his tongue at last; 'i shall not
stand to be laughed at.  i shall not bear it!'  and he would have broken
from the circle, but miss cathy seized him again.

'i did not mean to laugh at you,' she said; 'i could not hinder myself:
heathcliff, shake hands at least!  what are you sulky for?  it was only
that you looked odd.  if you wash your face and brush your hair, it will
be all right: but you are so di
 
 ___________________________
 
; who
could not comprehend how her remarks should have produced such an
exhibition of bad temper.

after playing lady's-maid to the new-comer, and putting my cakes in the
oven, and making the house and kitchen cheerful with great fires,
befitting christmas-eve, i prepared to sit down and amuse myself by
singing carols, all alone; regardless of joseph's affirmations that he
considered the merry tunes i chose as next door to songs.  he had retired
to private prayer in his chamber, and mr. and mrs. earnshaw were engaging
missy's attention by sundry gay trifles bought for her to present to the
little lintons, as an acknowledgment of their kindness.  they had invited
them to spend the morrow at wuthering heights, and the invitation had
been accepted, on one condition: mrs. linton begged that her darlings
might be kept carefully apart from that 'naughty swearing boy.'

under these circumstances i remained solitary.  i smelt the rich scent of
the heating spices; and admired the shining kitchen utensil
 
 ___________________________
 
 make his head ache.  it's like a colt's
mane over his eyes!'

he ventured this remark without any intention to insult; but heathcliff's
violent nature was not prepared to endure the appearance of impertinence
from one whom he seemed to hate, even then, as a rival.  he seized a
tureen of hot apple sauce (the first thing that came under his grip) and
dashed it full against the speaker's face and neck; who instantly
commenced a lament that brought isabella and catherine hurrying to the
place.  mr. earnshaw snatched up the culprit directly and conveyed him to
his chamber; where, doubtless, he administered a rough remedy to cool the
fit of passion, for he appeared red and breathless.  i got the dishcloth,
and rather spitefully scrubbed edgar's nose and mouth, affirming it
served him right for meddling.  his sister began weeping to go home, and
cathy stood by confounded, blushing for all.

'you should not have spoken to him!' she expostulated with master linton.
'he was in a bad temper, and now you'
 
 ___________________________
 
ly; 'you're not killed.
don't make more mischief; my brother is coming: be quiet!  hush,
isabella!  has anybody hurt you?'

'there, there, children--to your seats!' cried hindley, bustling in.
'that brute of a lad has warmed me nicely.  next time, master edgar, take
the law into your own fists--it will give you an appetite!'

the little party recovered its equanimity at sight of the fragrant feast.
they were hungry after their ride, and easily consoled, since no real
harm had befallen them.  mr. earnshaw carved bountiful platefuls, and the
mistress made them merry with lively talk.  i waited behind her chair,
and was pained to behold catherine, with dry eyes and an indifferent air,
commence cutting up the wing of a goose before her.  'an unfeeling
child,' i thought to myself; 'how lightly she dismisses her old
playmate's troubles.  i could not have imagined her to be so selfish.'
she lifted a mouthful to her lips: then she set it down again: her cheeks
flushed, and the tears gushed over them.  
 
 ___________________________
 
nted to supply the deficiency.  we got rid of all gloom in the
excitement of the exercise, and our pleasure was increased by the arrival
of the gimmerton band, mustering fifteen strong: a trumpet, a trombone,
clarionets, bassoons, french horns, and a bass viol, besides singers.
they go the rounds of all the respectable houses, and receive
contributions every christmas, and we esteemed it a first-rate treat to
hear them.  after the usual carols had been sung, we set them to songs
and glees.  mrs. earnshaw loved the music, and so they gave us plenty.

catherine loved it too: but she said it sounded sweetest at the top of
the steps, and she went up in the dark: i followed. they shut the house
door below, never noting our absence, it was so full of people. she made
no stay at the stairs'-head, but mounted farther, to the garret where
heathcliff was confined, and called him. he stubbornly declined
answering for a while: she persevered, and finally persuaded him to hold
communion with her through the
 
 ___________________________
 
 who lies till ten.'

'you shouldn't lie till ten.  there's the very prime of the morning gone
long before that time.  a person who has not done one-half his day's work
by ten o'clock, runs a chance of leaving the other half undone.'

'nevertheless, mrs. dean, resume your chair; because to-morrow i intend
lengthening the night till afternoon.  i prognosticate for myself an
obstinate cold, at least.'

'i hope not, sir.  well, you must allow me to leap over some three years;
during that space mrs. earnshaw--'

'no, no, i'll allow nothing of the sort!  are you acquainted with the
mood of mind in which, if you were seated alone, and the cat licking its
kitten on the rug before you, you would watch the operation so intently
that puss's neglect of one ear would put you seriously out of temper?'

'a terribly lazy mood, i should say.'

'on the contrary, a tiresomely active one. it is mine, at present; and,
therefore, continue minutely. i perceive that people in these regions
acquire over people in town
 
 ___________________________
 
also: unless it be that range of greek and latin, and that of french; and
those i know one from another: it is as much as you can expect of a poor
man's daughter.  however, if i am to follow my story in true gossip's
fashion, i had better go on; and instead of leaping three years, i will
be content to pass to the next summer--the summer of 1778, that is nearly
twenty-three years ago.'




chapter viii


on the morning of a fine june day my first bonny little nursling, and the
last of the ancient earnshaw stock, was born.  we were busy with the hay
in a far-away field, when the girl that usually brought our breakfasts
came running an hour too soon across the meadow and up the lane, calling
me as she ran.

'oh, such a grand bairn!' she panted out.  'the finest lad that ever
breathed!  but the doctor says missis must go: he says she's been in a
consumption these many months.  i heard him tell mr. hindley: and now she
has nothing to keep her, and she'll be dead before winter.  you must come
home di
 
 ___________________________
 
arly ready to run about, nell!' he replied, putting on a cheerful
smile.

'and the mistress?' i ventured to inquire; 'the doctor says she's--'

'damn the doctor!' he interrupted, reddening.  'frances is quite right:
she'll be perfectly well by this time next week.  are you going
up-stairs? will you tell her that i'll come, if she'll promise not to
talk.  i left her because she would not hold her tongue; and she
must--tell her mr. kenneth says she must be quiet.'

i delivered this message to mrs. earnshaw; she seemed in flighty spirits,
and replied merrily, 'i hardly spoke a word, ellen, and there he has gone
out twice, crying.  well, say i promise i won't speak: but that does not
bind me not to laugh at him!'

poor soul!  till within a week of her death that gay heart never failed
her; and her husband persisted doggedly, nay, furiously, in affirming her
health improved every day.  when kenneth warned him that his medicines
were useless at that stage of the malady, and he needn't put him to
furt
 
 ___________________________
 
it was a fever; and it is gone: her pulse is as slow as
mine now, and her cheek as cool.'

he told his wife the same story, and she seemed to believe him; but one
night, while leaning on his shoulder, in the act of saying she thought
she should be able to get up to-morrow, a fit of coughing took her--a
very slight one--he raised her in his arms; she put her two hands about
his neck, her face changed, and she was dead.

as the girl had anticipated, the child hareton fell wholly into my hands.
mr. earnshaw, provided he saw him healthy and never heard him cry, was
contented, as far as regarded him.  for himself, he grew desperate: his
sorrow was of that kind that will not lament.  he neither wept nor
prayed; he cursed and defied: execrated god and man, and gave himself up
to reckless dissipation.  the servants could not bear his tyrannical and
evil conduct long: joseph and i were the only two that would stay.  i had
not the heart to leave my charge; and besides, you know, i had been his
foster-sis
 
 ___________________________
 
t used
to hang on one side, and his wife's on the other; but hers has been
removed, or else you might see something of what she was.  can you make
that out?

mrs. dean raised the candle, and i discerned a soft-featured face,
exceedingly resembling the young lady at the heights, but more pensive
and amiable in expression.  it formed a sweet picture.  the long light
hair curled slightly on the temples; the eyes were large and serious; the
figure almost too graceful.  i did not marvel how catherine earnshaw
could forget her first friend for such an individual.  i marvelled much
how he, with a mind to correspond with his person, could fancy my idea of
catherine earnshaw.

'a very agreeable portrait,' i observed to the house-keeper.  'is it
like?'

'yes,' she answered; 'but he looked better when he was animated; that is
his everyday countenance: he wanted spirit in general.'

catherine had kept up her acquaintance with the lintons since her
five-weeks' residence among them; and as she had no temptat
 
 ___________________________
 
full of ambition--and led her to adopt a double character without
exactly intending to deceive any one. in the place where she heard
heathcliff termed a 'vulgar young ruffian,' and 'worse than a brute,'
she took care not to act like him; but at home she had small inclination
to practise politeness that would only be laughed at, and restrain an
unruly nature when it would bring her neither credit nor praise.

mr. edgar seldom mustered courage to visit wuthering heights openly.  he
had a terror of earnshaw's reputation, and shrunk from encountering him;
and yet he was always received with our best attempts at civility: the
master himself avoided offending him, knowing why he came; and if he
could not be gracious, kept out of the way.  i rather think his
appearance there was distasteful to catherine; she was not artful, never
played the coquette, and had evidently an objection to her two friends
meeting at all; for when heathcliff expressed contempt of linton in his
presence, she could not half co
 
 ___________________________
 
 having bad features, or being
deficient in intellect, he contrived to convey an impression of inward
and outward repulsiveness that his present aspect retains no traces of.
in the first place, he had by that time lost the benefit of his early
education: continual hard work, begun soon and concluded late, had
extinguished any curiosity he once possessed in pursuit of knowledge, and
any love for books or learning.  his childhood's sense of superiority,
instilled into him by the favours of old mr. earnshaw, was faded away.  he
struggled long to keep up an equality with catherine in her studies, and
yielded with poignant though silent regret: but he yielded completely;
and there was no prevailing on him to take a step in the way of moving
upward, when he found he must, necessarily, sink beneath his former
level.  then personal appearance sympathised with mental deterioration:
he acquired a slouching gait and ignoble look; his naturally reserved
disposition was exaggerated into an almost idiotic ex
 
 ___________________________
 
 bad as any marred
child: you'd better be riding home, or else she will be sick, only to
grieve us.'

the soft thing looked askance through the window: he possessed the power
to depart as much as a cat possesses the power to leave a mouse half
killed, or a bird half eaten.  ah, i thought, there will be no saving
him: he's doomed, and flies to his fate!  and so it was: he turned
abruptly, hastened into the house again, shut the door behind him; and
when i went in a while after to inform them that earnshaw had come home
rabid drunk, ready to pull the whole place about our ears (his ordinary
frame of mind in that condition), i saw the quarrel had merely effected a
closer intimacy--had broken the outworks of youthful timidity, and
enabled them to forsake the disguise of friendship, and confess
themselves lovers.

intelligence of mr. hindley's arrival drove linton speedily to his horse,
and catherine to her chamber.  i went to hide little hareton, and to take
the shot out of the master's fowling-pie
 
 ___________________________
 
s scarcely time to experience a thrill of horror before we saw
that the little wretch was safe.  heathcliff arrived underneath just at
the critical moment; by a natural impulse he arrested his descent, and
setting him on his feet, looked up to discover the author of the
accident.  a miser who has parted with a lucky lottery ticket for five
shillings, and finds next day he has lost in the bargain five thousand
pounds, could not show a blanker countenance than he did on beholding the
figure of mr. earnshaw above.  it expressed, plainer than words could do,
the intensest anguish at having made himself the instrument of thwarting
his own revenge.  had it been dark, i daresay he would have tried to
remedy the mistake by smashing hareton's skull on the steps; but, we
witnessed his salvation; and i was presently below with my precious
charge pressed to my heart.  hindley descended more leisurely, sobered
and abashed.

'it is your fault, ellen,' he said; 'you should have kept him out of
sight: you shou
 
 ___________________________
 
e off at the corner of the building: a
huge bough fell across the roof, and knocked down a portion of the east
chimney-stack, sending a clatter of stones and soot into the
kitchen-fire.  we thought a bolt had fallen in the middle of us; and
joseph swung on to his knees, beseeching the lord to remember the
patriarchs noah and lot, and, as in former times, spare the righteous,
though he smote the ungodly.  i felt some sentiment that it must be a
judgment on us also.  the jonah, in my mind, was mr. earnshaw; and i
shook the handle of his den that i might ascertain if he were yet living.
he replied audibly enough, in a fashion which made my companion
vociferate, more clamorously than before, that a wide distinction might
be drawn between saints like himself and sinners like his master.  but
the uproar passed away in twenty minutes, leaving us all unharmed;
excepting cathy, who got thoroughly drenched for her obstinacy in
refusing to take shelter, and standing bonnetless and shawlless to catch
as mu
 
 ___________________________
 
s; hindley had come out, and stood on the kitchen hearth, haggard
and drowsy.

'what ails you, cathy?' he was saying when i entered: 'you look as dismal
as a drowned whelp.  why are you so damp and pale, child?'

'i've been wet,' she answered reluctantly, 'and i'm cold, that's all.'

'oh, she is naughty!' i cried, perceiving the master to be tolerably
sober.  'she got steeped in the shower of yesterday evening, and there
she has sat the night through, and i couldn't prevail on her to stir.'

mr. earnshaw stared at us in surprise.  'the night through,' he repeated.
'what kept her up? not fear of the thunder, surely?  that was over hours
since.'

neither of us wished to mention heathcliff's absence, as long as we could
conceal it; so i replied, i didn't know how she took it into her head to
sit up; and she said nothing.  the morning was fresh and cool; i threw
back the lattice, and presently the room filled with sweet scents from
the garden; but catherine called peevishly to me, 'ellen, shut the

 
 ___________________________
 
ve in the
relation of a mere servant.  joseph fell under a ban also: he would speak
his mind, and lecture her all the same as if she were a little girl; and
she esteemed herself a woman, and our mistress, and thought that her
recent illness gave her a claim to be treated with consideration.  then
the doctor had said that she would not bear crossing much; she ought to
have her own way; and it was nothing less than murder in her eyes for any
one to presume to stand up and contradict her.  from mr. earnshaw and his
companions she kept aloof; and tutored by kenneth, and serious threats of
a fit that often attended her rages, her brother allowed her whatever she
pleased to demand, and generally avoided aggravating her fiery temper.  he
was rather too indulgent in humouring her caprices; not from affection,
but from pride: he wished earnestly to see her bring honour to the family
by an alliance with the lintons, and as long as she let him alone she
might trample on us like slaves, for aught he cared!
 
 ___________________________
 
, and foreign in tone; yet there was something in the
manner of pronouncing my name which made it sound familiar.  i turned
about to discover who spoke, fearfully; for the doors were shut, and i
had seen nobody on approaching the steps.  something stirred in the
porch; and, moving nearer, i distinguished a tall man dressed in dark
clothes, with dark face and hair.  he leant against the side, and held
his fingers on the latch as if intending to open for himself.  'who can
it be?' i thought.  'mr. earnshaw?  oh, no!  the voice has no resemblance
to his.'

'i have waited here an hour,' he resumed, while i continued staring; 'and
the whole of that time all round has been as still as death.  i dared not
enter.  you do not know me?  look, i'm not a stranger!'

a ray fell on his features; the cheeks were sallow, and half covered with
black whiskers; the brows lowering, the eyes deep-set and singular.  i
remembered the eyes.

'what!' i cried, uncertain whether to regard him as a worldly visitor,
and i 
 
 ___________________________
 
stion about
the candles, when a sense of my folly compelled me to return, and mutter,
'a person from gimmerton wishes to see you ma'am.'

'what does he want?' asked mrs. linton.

'i did not question him,' i answered.

'well, close the curtains, nelly,' she said; 'and bring up tea.  i'll be
back again directly.'

she quitted the apartment; mr. edgar inquired, carelessly, who it was.

'some one mistress does not expect,' i replied.  'that heathcliff--you
recollect him, sir--who used to live at mr. earnshaw's.'

'what! the gipsy--the ploughboy?' he cried.  'why did you not say so to
catherine?'

'hush! you must not call him by those names, master,' i said.  'she'd be
sadly grieved to hear you.  she was nearly heartbroken when he ran off.  i
guess his return will make a jubilee to her.'

mr. linton walked to a window on the other side of the room that
overlooked the court.  he unfastened it, and leant out.  i suppose they
were below, for he exclaimed quickly: 'don't stand there, love!  bring
the pe
 
 ___________________________
 
thirsty.'

she took her post before the urn; and miss isabella came, summoned by the
bell; then, having handed their chairs forward, i left the room.  the
meal hardly endured ten minutes.  catherine's cup was never filled: she
could neither eat nor drink.  edgar had made a slop in his saucer, and
scarcely swallowed a mouthful.  their guest did not protract his stay
that evening above an hour longer.  i asked, as he departed, if he went
to gimmerton?

'no, to wuthering heights,' he answered: 'mr. earnshaw invited me, when i
called this morning.'

mr. earnshaw invited _him_! and _he_ called on mr. earnshaw!  i pondered
this sentence painfully, after he was gone.  is he turning out a bit of a
hypocrite, and coming into the country to work mischief under a cloak?  i
mused: i had a presentiment in the bottom of my heart that he had better
have remained away.

about the middle of the night, i was wakened from my first nap by mrs.
linton gliding into my chamber, taking a seat on my bedside, and pullin
 
 ___________________________
 
ul, and a true one, or how could he remember her?'

'banish him from your thoughts, miss,' i said.  'he's a bird of bad omen:
no mate for you.  mrs. linton spoke strongly, and yet i can't contradict
her.  she is better acquainted with his heart than i, or any one besides;
and she never would represent him as worse than he is.  honest people
don't hide their deeds.  how has he been living? how has he got rich? why
is he staying at wuthering heights, the house of a man whom he abhors?
they say mr. earnshaw is worse and worse since he came.  they sit up all
night together continually, and hindley has been borrowing money on his
land, and does nothing but play and drink: i heard only a week ago--it
was joseph who told me--i met him at gimmerton: "nelly," he said, "we's
hae a crowner's 'quest enow, at ahr folks'.  one on 'em 's a'most getten
his finger cut off wi' hauding t' other fro' stickin' hisseln loike a
cawlf.  that's maister, yeah knaw, 'at 's soa up o' going tuh t' grand
'sizes.  he's noan 
 
 ___________________________
 
s she were more submissive to his
directions than she had shown herself before.

'nelly dean,' said he, 'i can't help fancying there's an extra cause for
this.  what has there been to do at the grange?  we've odd reports up
here.  a stout, hearty lass like catherine does not fall ill for a
trifle; and that sort of people should not either.  it's hard work
bringing them through fevers, and such things.  how did it begin?'

'the master will inform you,' i answered; 'but you are acquainted with
the earnshaws' violent dispositions, and mrs. linton caps them all.  i
may say this; it commenced in a quarrel.  she was struck during a tempest
of passion with a kind of fit.  that's her account, at least: for she
flew off in the height of it, and locked herself up.  afterwards, she
refused to eat, and now she alternately raves and remains in a half
dream; knowing those about her, but having her mind filled with all sorts
of strange ideas and illusions.'

'mr. linton will be sorry?' observed kenneth, inter
 
 ___________________________
 
e, and was almost inclined to
slip away before he finished cursing, but ere i could execute that
intention, he ordered me in, and shut and re-fastened the door.  there
was a great fire, and that was all the light in the huge apartment, whose
floor had grown a uniform grey; and the once brilliant pewter-dishes,
which used to attract my gaze when i was a girl, partook of a similar
obscurity, created by tarnish and dust.  i inquired whether i might call
the maid, and be conducted to a bedroom!  mr. earnshaw vouchsafed no
answer.  he walked up and down, with his hands in his pockets, apparently
quite forgetting my presence; and his abstraction was evidently so deep,
and his whole aspect so misanthropical, that i shrank from disturbing him
again.

you'll not be surprised, ellen, at my feeling particularly cheerless,
seated in worse than solitude on that inhospitable hearth, and
remembering that four miles distant lay my delightful home, containing
the only people i loved on earth; and there might as
 
 ___________________________
 
 he did not fear
their intermeddling.

i sat and thought a doleful time: the clock struck eight, and nine, and
still my companion paced to and fro, his head bent on his breast, and
perfectly silent, unless a groan or a bitter ejaculation forced itself
out at intervals.  i listened to detect a woman's voice in the house, and
filled the interim with wild regrets and dismal anticipations, which, at
last, spoke audibly in irrepressible sighing and weeping.  i was not
aware how openly i grieved, till earnshaw halted opposite, in his
measured walk, and gave me a stare of newly-awakened surprise.  taking
advantage of his recovered attention, i exclaimed--'i'm tired with my
journey, and i want to go to bed!  where is the maid-servant?  direct me
to her, as she won't come to me!'

'we have none,' he answered; 'you must wait on yourself!'

'where must i sleep, then?' i sobbed; i was beyond regarding
self-respect, weighed down by fatigue and wretchedness.

'joseph will show you heathcliff's chamber,' said
 
 ___________________________
 
 he; 'open that
door--he's in there.'

i was going to obey, but he suddenly arrested me, and added in the
strangest tone--'be so good as to turn your lock, and draw your
bolt--don't omit it!'

'well!' i said.  'but why, mr. earnshaw?'  i did not relish the notion of
deliberately fastening myself in with heathcliff.

'look here!' he replied, pulling from his waistcoat a
curiously-constructed pistol, having a double-edged spring knife attached
to the barrel.  'that's a great tempter to a desperate man, is it not?  i
cannot resist going up with this every night, and trying his door.  if
once i find it open he's done for; i do it invariably, even though the
minute before i have been recalling a hundred reasons that should make
 
 ___________________________
 

face assumed during a brief second: it was not horror, it was
covetousness.  he snatched the pistol back, jealously; shut the knife,
and returned it to its concealment.

'i don't care if you tell him,' said he.  'put him on his guard, and
watch for him.  you know the terms we are on, i see: his danger does not
shock you.'

'what has heathcliff done to you?' i asked.  'in what has he wronged you,
to warrant this appalling hatred?  wouldn't it be wiser to bid him quit
the house?'

'no!' thundered earnshaw; 'should he offer to leave me, he's a dead man:
persuade him to attempt it, and you are a murderess!  am i to lose _all_,
without a chance of retrieval?  is hareton to be a beggar?  oh,
damnation!  i _will_ have it back; and i'll have _his_ gold too; and then
his blood; and hell shall have his soul!  it will be ten times blacker
with that guest than ever it was before!'

you've acquainted me, ellen, with your old master's habits.  he is
clearly on the verge of madness: he was so last night at l
 
 ___________________________
 
tchen.  joseph was
bending over the fire, peering into a large pan that swung above it; and
a wooden bowl of oatmeal stood on the settle close by.  the contents of
the pan began to boil, and he turned to plunge his hand into the bowl; i
conjectured that this preparation was probably for our supper, and, being
hungry, i resolved it should be eatable; so, crying out sharply, '_i'll_
make the porridge!'  i removed the vessel out of his reach, and proceeded
to take off my hat and riding-habit.  'mr. earnshaw,' i continued,
'directs me to wait on myself: i will.  i'm not going to act the lady
among you, for fear i should starve.'

'gooid lord!' he muttered, sitting down, and stroking his ribbed
stockings from the knee to the ankle.  'if there's to be fresh
ortherings--just when i getten used to two maisters, if i mun hev' a
_mistress_ set o'er my heead, it's like time to be flitting.  i niver
_did_ think to see t' day that i mud lave th' owld place--but i doubt
it's nigh at hand!'

this lamentation 
 
 ___________________________
 
xpected aid presently appeared in the shape of throttler, whom i
now recognised as a son of our old skulker: it had spent its whelphood
at the grange, and was given by my father to mr. hindley. i fancy it
knew me: it pushed its nose against mine by way of salute, and then
hastened to devour the porridge; while i groped from step to step,
collecting the shattered earthenware, and drying the spatters of milk
from the banister with my pocket-handkerchief. our labours were scarcely
over when i heard earnshaw's tread in the passage; my assistant tucked
in his tail, and pressed to the wall; i stole into the nearest doorway.
the dog's endeavour to avoid him was unsuccessful; as i guessed by a
scutter down-stairs, and a prolonged, piteous yelping. i had better
luck: he passed on, entered his chamber, and shut the door. directly
after joseph came up with hareton, to put him to bed. i had found
shelter in hareton's room, and the old man, on seeing me, said,--'they's
rahm for boath ye un' yer pride, now, 
 
 ___________________________
 
for bringing it all on herself; and ended by hoping
that he would follow mr. linton's example and avoid future interference
with his family, for good or evil.

'mrs. linton is now just recovering,' i said; 'she'll never be like she
was, but her life is spared; and if you really have a regard for her,
you'll shun crossing her way again: nay, you'll move out of this country
entirely; and that you may not regret it, i'll inform you catherine
linton is as different now from your old friend catherine earnshaw, as
that young lady is different from me.  her appearance is changed greatly,
her character much more so; and the person who is compelled, of
necessity, to be her companion, will only sustain his affection hereafter
by the remembrance of what she once was, by common humanity, and a sense
of duty!'

'that is quite possible,' remarked heathcliff, forcing himself to seem
calm: 'quite possible that your master should have nothing but common
humanity and a sense of duty to fall back upon.  but do yo
 
 ___________________________
 
strong you are!  how many years do you mean to live after i
am gone?'

heathcliff had knelt on one knee to embrace her; he attempted to rise,
but she seized his hair, and kept him down.

'i wish i could hold you,' she continued, bitterly, 'till we were both
dead!  i shouldn't care what you suffered.  i care nothing for your
sufferings.  why shouldn't you suffer?  i do!  will you forget me?  will
you be happy when i am in the earth?  will you say twenty years hence,
"that's the grave of catherine earnshaw?  i loved her long ago, and was
wretched to lose her; but it is past.  i've loved many others since: my
children are dearer to me than she was; and, at death, i shall not
rejoice that i am going to her: i shall be sorry that i must leave
them!"  will you say so, heathcliff?'

'don't torture me till i'm as mad as yourself,' cried he, wrenching his
head free, and grinding his teeth.

the two, to a cool spectator, made a strange and fearful picture.  well
might catherine deem that heaven would be 
 
 ___________________________
 
; and her latest
ideas wandered back to pleasant early days.  her life closed in a gentle
dream--may she wake as kindly in the other world!'

'may she wake in torment!' he cried, with frightful vehemence, stamping
his foot, and groaning in a sudden paroxysm of ungovernable passion.
'why, she's a liar to the end!  where is she?  not _there_--not in
heaven--not perished--where?  oh! you said you cared nothing for my
sufferings!  and i pray one prayer--i repeat it till my tongue
stiffens--catherine earnshaw, may you not rest as long as i am living;
you said i killed you--haunt me, then!  the murdered _do_ haunt their
murderers, i believe.  i know that ghosts _have_ wandered on earth.  be
with me always--take any form--drive me mad! only _do_ not leave me in
this abyss, where i cannot find you!  oh, god! it is unutterable!  i
_cannot_ live without my life!  i _cannot_ live without my soul!'

he dashed his head against the knotted trunk; and, lifting up his eyes,
howled, not like a man, but like a s
 
 ___________________________
 
sence by the slightest noise.  indeed, i shouldn't have
discovered that he had been there, except for the disarrangement of the
drapery about the corpse's face, and for observing on the floor a curl of
light hair, fastened with a silver thread; which, on examination, i
ascertained to have been taken from a locket hung round catherine's neck.
heathcliff had opened the trinket and cast out its contents, replacing
them by a black lock of his own.  i twisted the two, and enclosed them
together.

mr. earnshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains of his sister
to the grave; he sent no excuse, but he never came; so that, besides her
husband, the mourners were wholly composed of tenants and servants.
isabella was not asked.

the place of catherine's interment, to the surprise of the villagers, was
neither in the chapel under the carved monument of the lintons, nor yet
by the tombs of her own relations, outside.  it was dug on a green slope
in a corner of the kirk-yard, where the wall is so low
 
 ___________________________
 
possess his
wicked head!  and besides, edgar has not been kind, has he?  and i won't
come suing for his assistance; nor will i bring him into more trouble.
necessity compelled me to seek shelter here; though, if i had not learned
he was out of the way, i'd have halted at the kitchen, washed my face,
warmed myself, got you to bring what i wanted, and departed again to
anywhere out of the reach of my accursed--of that incarnate goblin!  ah,
he was in such a fury!  if he had caught me!  it's a pity earnshaw is not
his match in strength: i wouldn't have run till i'd seen him all but
demolished, had hindley been able to do it!'

'well, don't talk so fast, miss!' i interrupted; 'you'll disorder the
handkerchief i have tied round your face, and make the cut bleed again.
drink your tea, and take breath, and give over laughing: laughter is
sadly out of place under this roof, and in your condition!'

'an undeniable truth,' she replied.  'listen to that child!  it maintains
a constant wail--send it out of
 
 ___________________________
 
 succeeded in rousing his rage a pitch above his
malignity.  pulling out the nerves with red hot pincers requires more
coolness than knocking on the head.  he was worked up to forget the
fiendish prudence he boasted of, and proceeded to murderous violence.  i
experienced pleasure in being able to exasperate him: the sense of
pleasure woke my instinct of self-preservation, so i fairly broke free;
and if ever i come into his hands again he is welcome to a signal
revenge.

'yesterday, you know, mr. earnshaw should have been at the funeral.  he
kept himself sober for the purpose--tolerably sober: not going to bed mad
at six o'clock and getting up drunk at twelve.  consequently, he rose, in
suicidal low spirits, as fit for the church as for a dance; and instead,
he sat down by the fire and swallowed gin or brandy by tumblerfuls.

'heathcliff--i shudder to name him! has been a stranger in the house from
last sunday till to-day.  whether the angels have fed him, or his kin
beneath, i cannot tell; but 
 
 ___________________________
 
ou wouldn't think that i should cry at
anything joseph could say; but he and hareton are detestable companions.
i'd rather sit with hindley, and hear his awful talk, than with "t'
little maister" and his staunch supporter, that odious old man!  when
heathcliff is in, i'm often obliged to seek the kitchen and their
society, or starve among the damp uninhabited chambers; when he is not,
as was the case this week, i establish a table and chair at one corner of
the house fire, and never mind how mr. earnshaw may occupy himself; and
he does not interfere with my arrangements.  he is quieter now than he
used to be, if no one provokes him: more sullen and depressed, and less
furious.  joseph affirms he's sure he's an altered man: that the lord has
touched his heart, and he is saved "so as by fire."  i'm puzzled to
detect signs of the favourable change: but it is not my business.

'yester-evening i sat in my nook reading some old books till late on
towards twelve.  it seemed so dismal to go up-stairs, 
 
 ___________________________
 
f yourself, and
hareton justice!  and you needn't trouble your head to screen me;
catherine is gone.  nobody alive would regret me, or be ashamed, though i
cut my throat this minute--and it's time to make an end!"

'i might as well have struggled with a bear, or reasoned with a lunatic.
the only resource left me was to run to a lattice and warn his intended
victim of the fate which awaited him.

'"you'd better seek shelter somewhere else to-night!" i exclaimed, in
rather a triumphant tone.  "mr. earnshaw has a mind to shoot you, if you
persist in endeavouring to enter."

'"you'd better open the door, you--" he answered, addressing me by some
elegant term that i don't care to repeat.

'"i shall not meddle in the matter," i retorted again.  "come in and get
shot, if you please.  i've done my duty."

'with that i shut the window and returned to my place by the fire; having
too small a stock of hypocrisy at my command to pretend any anxiety for
the danger that menaced him.  earnshaw swore passionat
 
 ___________________________
 

imagine how you think of surviving her loss."

'"he's there, is he?" exclaimed my companion, rushing to the gap.  "if i
can get my arm out i can hit him!"

'i'm afraid, ellen, you'll set me down as really wicked; but you don't
know all, so don't judge.  i wouldn't have aided or abetted an attempt on
even _his_ life for anything.  wish that he were dead, i must; and
therefore i was fearfully disappointed, and unnerved by terror for the
consequences of my taunting speech, when he flung himself on earnshaw's
weapon and wrenched it from his grasp.

'the charge exploded, and the knife, in springing back, closed into its
owner's wrist.  heathcliff pulled it away by main force, slitting up the
flesh as it passed on, and thrust it dripping into his pocket.  he then
took a stone, struck down the division between two windows, and sprang
in.  his adversary had fallen senseless with excessive pain and the flow
of blood, that gushed from an artery or a large vein.  the ruffian kicked
and trampled on him, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd dashed his head repeatedly against the flags,
holding me with one hand, meantime, to prevent me summoning joseph.  he
exerted preterhuman self-denial in abstaining from finishing him
completely; but getting out of breath, he finally desisted, and dragged
the apparently inanimate body on to the settle.  there he tore off the
sleeve of earnshaw's coat, and bound up the wound with brutal roughness;
spitting and cursing during the operation as energetically as he had
kicked before.  being at liberty, i lost no time in seeking the old
servant; who, having gathered by degrees the purport of my hasty tale,
hurried below, gasping, as he descended the steps two at once.

'"what is ther to do, now? what is ther to do, now?"

'"there's this to do," thundered heathcliff, "that your master's mad; and
should he last another month, i'll have him t
 
 ___________________________
 
  mr. linton was a magistrate, and though he
had fifty wives dead, he should inquire into this.  he was so obstinate
in his resolution, that heathcliff deemed it expedient to compel from my
lips a recapitulation of what had taken place; standing over me, heaving
with malevolence, as i reluctantly delivered the account in answer to his
questions.  it required a great deal of labour to satisfy the old man
that heathcliff was not the aggressor; especially with my hardly-wrung
replies.  however, mr. earnshaw soon convinced him that he was alive
still; joseph hastened to administer a dose of spirits, and by their
succour his master presently regained motion and consciousness.
heathcliff, aware that his opponent was ignorant of the treatment
received while insensible, called him deliriously intoxicated; and said
he should not notice his atrocious conduct further, but advised him to
get to bed.  to my joy, he left us, after giving this judicious counsel,
and hindley stretched himself on the hearthston
 
 ___________________________
 
ick; his evil genius, almost as
gaunt and ghastly, leant against the chimney.  neither appeared inclined
to dine, and, having waited till all was cold on the table, i commenced
alone.  nothing hindered me from eating heartily, and i experienced a
certain sense of satisfaction and superiority, as, at intervals, i cast a
look towards my silent companions, and felt the comfort of a quiet
conscience within me.  after i had done, i ventured on the unusual
liberty of drawing near the fire, going round earnshaw's seat, and
kneeling in the corner beside him.

'heathcliff did not glance my way, and i gazed up, and contemplated his
features almost as confidently as if they had been turned to stone.  his
forehead, that i once thought so manly, and that i now think so
diabolical, was shaded with a heavy cloud; his basilisk eyes were nearly
quenched by sleeplessness, and weeping, perhaps, for the lashes were wet
then: his lips devoid of their ferocious sneer, and sealed in an
expression of unspeakable sadne
 
 ___________________________
 
 for fear of offending her.  it's well people don't _really_
rise from their grave, or, last night, she might have witnessed a
repulsive scene!  are not you bruised, and cut over your chest and
shoulders?"

'"i can't say," he answered, "but what do you mean?  did he dare to
strike me when i was down?"

'"he trampled on and kicked you, and dashed you on the ground," i
whispered.  "and his mouth watered to tear you with his teeth; because
he's only half man: not so much, and the rest fiend."

'mr. earnshaw looked up, like me, to the countenance of our mutual foe;
who, absorbed in his anguish, seemed insensible to anything around him:
the longer he stood, the plainer his reflections revealed their blackness
through his features.

'"oh, if god would but give me strength to strangle him in my last agony,
i'd go to hell with joy," groaned the impatient man, writhing to rise,
and sinking back in despair, convinced of his inadequacy for the
struggle.

'"nay, it's enough that he has murdered one of you,
 
 ___________________________
 
and red; and
her--"

'"get up, wretched idiot, before i stamp you to death!" he cried, making
a movement that caused me to make one also.

'"but then," i continued, holding myself ready to flee, "if poor
catherine had trusted you, and assumed the ridiculous, contemptible,
degrading title of mrs. heathcliff, she would soon have presented a
similar picture!  _she_ wouldn't have borne your abominable behaviour
quietly: her detestation and disgust must have found voice."

'the back of the settle and earnshaw's person interposed between me and
him; so instead of endeavouring to reach me, he snatched a dinner-knife
from the table and flung it at my head.  it struck beneath my ear, and
stopped the sentence i was uttering; but, pulling it out, i sprang to the
door and delivered another; which i hope went a little deeper than his
missile.  the last glimpse i caught of him was a furious rush on his
part, checked by the embrace of his host; and both fell locked together
on the hearth.  in my flight throug
 
 ___________________________
 
stammer a word or totter a step it wielded a despot's sceptre in his
heart.  it was named catherine; but he never called it the name in full,
as he had never called the first catherine short: probably because
heathcliff had a habit of doing so.  the little one was always cathy: it
formed to him a distinction from the mother, and yet a connection with
her; and his attachment sprang from its relation to her, far more than
from its being his own.

i used to draw a comparison between him and hindley earnshaw, and perplex
myself to explain satisfactorily why their conduct was so opposite in
similar circumstances.  they had both been fond husbands, and were both
attached to their children; and i could not see how they shouldn't both
have taken the same road, for good or evil.  but, i thought in my mind,
hindley, with apparently the stronger head, has shown himself sadly the
worse and the weaker man.  when his ship struck, the captain abandoned
his post; and the crew, instead of trying to save her, ru
 
 ___________________________
 
shed into riot
and confusion, leaving no hope for their luckless vessel.  linton, on the
contrary, displayed the true courage of a loyal and faithful soul: he
trusted god; and god comforted him.  one hoped, and the other despaired:
they chose their own lots, and were righteously doomed to endure them.
but you'll not want to hear my moralising, mr. lockwood; you'll judge, as
well as i can, all these things: at least, you'll think you will, and
that's the same.  the end of earnshaw was what might have been expected;
it followed fast on his sister's: there were scarcely six months between
them.  we, at the grange, never got a very succinct account of his state
preceding it; all that i did learn was on occasion of going to aid in the
preparations for the funeral.  mr. kenneth came to announce the event to
my master.

'well, nelly,' said he, riding into the yard one morning, too early not
to alarm me with an instant presentiment of bad news, 'it's yours and my
turn to go int
 
 ___________________________
 
'who?' i asked in a flurry.

'why, guess!' he returned, dismounting, and slinging his bridle on a hook
by the door.  'and nip up the corner of your apron: i'm certain you'll
need it.'

'not mr. heathcliff, surely?' i exclaimed.

'what! would you have tears for him?' said the doctor.  'no, heathcliff's
a tough young fellow: he looks blooming to-day.  i've just seen him.  he's
rapidly regaining flesh since he lost his better half.'

'who is it, then, mr. kenneth?' i repeated impatiently.

'hindley earnshaw!  your old friend hindley,' he replied, 'and my wicked
gossip: though he's been too wild for me this long while.  there!  i said
we should draw water.  but cheer up!  he died true to his character:
drunk as a lord.  poor lad!  i'm sorry, too.  one can't help missing an
old companion: though he had the worst tricks with him that ever man
imagined, and has done me many a rascally turn.  he's barely
twenty-seven, it seems; that's your own age: who would have thought you
were born in one year?'

i 
 
 ___________________________
 
n in which
he lay; and i said my old master and foster-brother had a claim on my
services as strong as his own.  besides, i reminded him that the child
hareton was his wife's nephew, and, in the absence of nearer kin, he
ought to act as its guardian; and he ought to and must inquire how the
property was left, and look over the concerns of his brother-in-law.  he
was unfit for attending to such matters then, but he bid me speak to his
lawyer; and at length permitted me to go.  his lawyer had been earnshaw's
also: i called at the village, and asked him to accompany me.  he shook
his head, and advised that heathcliff should be let alone; affirming, if
the truth were known, hareton would be found little else than a beggar.

'his father died in debt,' he said; 'the whole property is mortgaged, and
the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow him an opportunity of
creating some interest in the creditor's heart, that he may be inclined
to deal leniently towards him.'

when i reached the heights, i
 
 ___________________________
 
reton go undisputed; but i'll be pretty sure
to make the other come!  remember to tell him.'

this hint was enough to bind our hands.  i repeated its substance on my
return; and edgar linton, little interested at the commencement, spoke no
more of interfering.  i'm not aware that he could have done it to any
purpose, had he been ever so willing.

the guest was now the master of wuthering heights: he held firm
possession, and proved to the attorney--who, in his turn, proved it to
mr. linton--that earnshaw had mortgaged every yard of land he owned for
cash to supply his mania for gaming; and he, heathcliff, was the
mortgagee.  in that manner hareton, who should now be the first gentleman
in the neighbourhood, was reduced to a state of complete dependence on
his father's inveterate enemy; and lives in his own house as a servant,
deprived of the advantage of wages: quite unable to right himself,
because of his friendlessness, and his ignorance that he has been
wronged.




chapter xviii


the twelv
 
 ___________________________
 
ng that dismal period were
the happiest of my life: my greatest troubles in their passage rose from
our little lady's trifling illnesses, which she had to experience in
common with all children, rich and poor.  for the rest, after the first
six months, she grew like a larch, and could walk and talk too, in her
own way, before the heath blossomed a second time over mrs. linton's
dust.  she was the most winning thing that ever brought sunshine into a
desolate house: a real beauty in face, with the earnshaws' handsome dark
eyes, but the lintons' fair skin and small features, and yellow curling
hair.  her spirit was high, though not rough, and qualified by a heart
sensitive and lively to excess in its affections.  that capacity for
intense attachments reminded me of her mother: still she did not resemble
her: for she could be soft and mild as a dove, and she had a gentle voice
and pensive expression: her anger was never furious; her love never
fierce: it was deep and tender.  however, it must be ac
 
 ___________________________
 
he appeared
to have bent his malevolence on making him a brute: he was never taught
to read or write; never rebuked for any bad habit which did not annoy his
keeper; never led a single step towards virtue, or guarded by a single
precept against vice.  and from what i heard, joseph contributed much to
his deterioration, by a narrow-minded partiality which prompted him to
flatter and pet him, as a boy, because he was the head of the old family.
and as he had been in the habit of accusing catherine earnshaw and
heathcliff, when children, of putting the master past his patience, and
compelling him to seek solace in drink by what he termed their 'offald
ways,' so at present he laid the whole burden of hareton's faults on the
shoulders of the usurper of his property.  if the lad swore, he wouldn't
correct him: nor however culpably he behaved.  it gave joseph
satisfaction, apparently, to watch him go the worst lengths: he allowed
that the lad was ruined: that his soul was abandoned to perdition; but
t
 
 ___________________________
 
, turning to take a last glance into the valley, whence a light
mist mounted and formed a fleecy cloud on the skirts of the blue.

'it is not so buried in trees,' i replied, 'and it is not quite so large,
but you can see the country beautifully all round; and the air is
healthier for you--fresher and drier.  you will, perhaps, think the
building old and dark at first; though it is a respectable house: the
next best in the neighbourhood.  and you will have such nice rambles on
the moors.  hareton earnshaw--that is, miss cathy's other cousin, and so
yours in a manner--will show you all the sweetest spots; and you can
bring a book in fine weather, and make a green hollow your study; and,
now and then, your uncle may join you in a walk: he does, frequently,
walk out on the hills.'

'and what is my father like?' he asked.  'is he as young and handsome as
uncle?'

'he's as young,' said i; 'but he has black hair and eyes, and looks
sterner; and he is taller and bigger altogether.  he'll not seem to yo
 
 ___________________________
 
of summer; and joseph's bacca-pipe is
poison; and he must always have sweets and dainties, and always milk,
milk for ever--heeding naught how the rest of us are pinched in winter;
and there he'll sit, wrapped in his furred cloak in his chair by the
fire, with some toast and water or other slop on the hob to sip at; and
if hareton, for pity, comes to amuse him--hareton is not bad-natured,
though he's rough--they're sure to part, one swearing and the other
crying. i believe the master would relish earnshaw's thrashing him to a
mummy, if he were not his son; and i'm certain he would be fit to turn
him out of doors, if he knew half the nursing he gives hisseln. but then
he won't go into danger of temptation: he never enters the parlour, and
should linton show those ways in the house where he is, he sends him
up-stairs directly.'

i divined, from this account, that utter lack of sympathy had rendered
young heathcliff selfish and disagreeable, if he were not so originally;
and my interest in him, con
 
 ___________________________
 

'you'll be the favourite among us, hareton!  she says you are a--what was
it?  well, something very flattering.  here! you go with her round the
farm.  and behave like a gentleman, mind!  don't use any bad words; and
don't stare when the young lady is not looking at you, and be ready to
hide your face when she is; and, when you speak, say your words slowly,
and keep your hands out of your pockets.  be off, and entertain her as
nicely as you can.'

he watched the couple walking past the window.  earnshaw had his
countenance completely averted from his companion.  he seemed studying
the familiar landscape with a stranger's and an artist's interest.
catherine took a sly look at him, expressing small admiration.  she then
turned her attention to seeking out objects of amusement for herself, and
tripped merrily on, lilting a tune to supply the lack of conversation.

'i've tied his tongue,' observed heathcliff.  'he'll not venture a single
syllable all the time!  nelly, you recollect me at his age--
 
 ___________________________
 
aid to his cousin.  'could you
believe in the existence of such a colossal dunce?'

'is he all as he should be?' asked miss cathy, seriously; 'or is he
simple: not right?  i've questioned him twice now, and each time he
looked so stupid i think he does not understand me.  i can hardly
understand him, i'm sure!'

linton repeated his laugh, and glanced at hareton tauntingly; who
certainly did not seem quite clear of comprehension at that moment.

'there's nothing the matter but laziness; is there, earnshaw?' he said.
'my cousin fancies you are an idiot.  there you experience the
consequence of scorning "book-larning," as you would say.  have you
noticed, catherine, his frightful yorkshire pronunciation?'

'why, where the devil is the use on't?' growled hareton, more ready in
answering his daily companion.  he was about to enlarge further, but the
two youngsters broke into a noisy fit of merriment: my giddy miss being
delighted to discover that she might turn his strange talk to matter of
amusemen
 
 ___________________________
 
d how papa would object to my going: and
then i negotiated with him about the pony.  he is fond of reading, and he
thinks of leaving soon to get married; so he offered, if i would lend him
books out of the library, to do what i wished: but i preferred giving him
my own, and that satisfied him better.

'on my second visit linton seemed in lively spirits; and zillah (that is
their housekeeper) made us a clean room and a good fire, and told us
that, as joseph was out at a prayer-meeting and hareton earnshaw was off
with his dogs--robbing our woods of pheasants, as i heard afterwards--we
might do what we liked.  she brought me some warm wine and gingerbread,
and appeared exceedingly good-natured, and linton sat in the arm-chair,
and i in the little rocking chair on the hearth-stone, and we laughed and
talked so merrily, and found so much to say: we planned where we would
go, and what we would do in summer.  i needn't repeat that, because you
would call it silly.

'one time, however, we were near qu
 
 ___________________________
 
g home as light as air;
and i dreamt of wuthering heights and my sweet, darling cousin, till
morning.

'on the morrow i was sad; partly because you were poorly, and partly that
i wished my father knew, and approved of my excursions: but it was
beautiful moonlight after tea; and, as i rode on, the gloom cleared.  i
shall have another happy evening, i thought to myself; and what delights
me more, my pretty linton will.  i trotted up their garden, and was
turning round to the back, when that fellow earnshaw met me, took my
bridle, and bid me go in by the front entrance.  he patted minny's neck,
and said she was a bonny beast, and appeared as if he wanted me to speak
to him.  i only told him to leave my horse alone, or else it would kick
him.  he answered in his vulgar accent, "it wouldn't do mitch hurt if it
did;" and surveyed its legs with a smile.  i was half inclined to make it
try; however, he moved off to open the door, and, as he raised the latch,
he looked up to the inscription above, and s
 
 ___________________________
 
aid, with a stupid mixture of
awkwardness and elation: "miss catherine!  i can read yon, now."

'"wonderful," i exclaimed.  "pray let us hear you--you _are_ grown
clever!"

'he spelt, and drawled over by syllables, the name--"hareton earnshaw."

'"and the figures?" i cried, encouragingly, perceiving that he came to a
dead halt.

'"i cannot tell them yet," he answered.

'"oh, you dunce!" i said, laughing heartily at his failure.

'the fool stared, with a grin hovering about his lips, and a scowl
gathering over his eyes, as if uncertain whether he might not join in my
mirth: whether it were not pleasant familiarity, or what it really was,
contempt.  i settled his doubts, by suddenly retrieving my gravity and
desiring him to walk away,
 
 ___________________________
 
ttle, and half got up to welcome me.

'"i'm ill to-night, catherine, love," he said; "and you must have all the
talk, and let me listen.  come, and sit by me.  i was sure you wouldn't
break your word, and i'll make you promise again, before you go."

'i knew now that i mustn't tease him, as he was ill; and i spoke softly
and put no questions, and avoided irritating him in any way.  i had
brought some of my nicest books for him: he asked me to read a little of
one, and i was about to comply, when earnshaw burst the door open: having
gathered venom with reflection.  he advanced direct to us, seized linton
by the arm, and swung him off the seat.

'"get to thy own room!" he said, in a voice almost inarticulate with
passion; and his face looked swelled and furious.  "take her there if she
comes to see thee: thou shalln't keep me out of this.  begone wi' ye
both!"

'he swore at us, and left linton no time to answer, nearly throwing him
into the kitchen; and he clenched his fist as i followed, seeming
 
 ___________________________
 
hands, and tried to pull him away; but he
shrieked so shockingly that i dared not proceed.  at last his cries were
choked by a dreadful fit of coughing; blood gushed from his mouth, and he
fell on the ground.  i ran into the yard, sick with terror; and called
for zillah, as loud as i could.  she soon heard me: she was milking the
cows in a shed behind the barn, and hurrying from her work, she inquired
what there was to do?  i hadn't breath to explain; dragging her in, i
looked about for linton.  earnshaw had come out to examine the mischief
he had caused, and he was then conveying the poor thing up-stairs.  zillah
and i ascended after him; but he stopped me at the top of the steps, and
said i shouldn't go in: i must go home.  i exclaimed that he had killed
linton, and i _would_ enter.  joseph locked the door, and declared i
should do "no sich stuff," and asked me whether i were "bahn to be as mad
as him."  i stood crying till the housekeeper reappeared.  she affirmed
he would be better in a bit
 
 ___________________________
 
ring anything about him, that my resolution melted into air before it
was properly formed.  it had appeared wrong to take the journey once; now
it seemed wrong to refrain.  michael came to ask if he must saddle minny;
i said "yes," and considered myself doing a duty as she bore me over the
hills.  i was forced to pass the front windows to get to the court: it
was no use trying to conceal my presence.

'"young master is in the house," said zillah, as she saw me making for
the parlour.  i went in; earnshaw was there also, but he quitted the room
directly.  linton sat in the great arm-chair half asleep; walking up to
the fire, i began in a serious tone, partly meaning it to be true--

'"as you don't like me, linton, and as you think i come on purpose to
hurt you, and pretend that i do so every time, this is our last meeting:
let us say good-bye; and tell mr. heathcliff that you have no wish to see
me, and that he mustn't invent any more falsehoods on the subject."

'"sit down and take your hat off
 
 ___________________________
 
u'd been found, and he'd lodged
you here!  what! and you must have got on an island, sure?  and how long
were you in the hole?  did master save you, mrs. dean?  but you're not so
thin--you've not been so poorly, have you?'

'your master is a true scoundrel!' i replied.  'but he shall answer for
it.  he needn't have raised that tale: it shall all be laid bare!'

'what do you mean?' asked zillah.  'it's not his tale: they tell that in
the village--about your being lost in the marsh; and i calls to earnshaw,
when i come in--"eh, they's queer things, mr. hareton, happened since i
went off.  it's a sad pity of that likely young lass, and cant nelly
dean."  he stared.  i thought he had not heard aught, so i told him the
rumour.  the master listened, and he just smiled to himself, and said,
"if they have been in the marsh, they are out now, zillah.  nelly dean is
lodged, at this minute, in your room.  you can tell her to flit, when you
go up; here is the key.  the bog-water got into her head, and she 
 
 ___________________________
 
me, but on the earth.  a sudden
sense of relief flowed from my heart through every limb.  i relinquished
my labour of agony, and turned consoled at once: unspeakably consoled.
her presence was with me: it remained while i re-filled the grave, and
led me home.  you may laugh, if you will; but i was sure i should see her
there.  i was sure she was with me, and i could not help talking to her.
having reached the heights, i rushed eagerly to the door.  it was
fastened; and, i remember, that accursed earnshaw and my wife opposed my
entrance.  i remember stopping to kick the breath out of him, and then
hurrying up-stairs, to my room and hers.  i looked round impatiently--i
felt her by me--i could _almost_ see her, and yet i _could not_!  i ought
to have sweat blood then, from the anguish of my yearning--from the
fervour of my supplications to have but one glimpse!  i had not one.  she
showed herself, as she often was in life, a devil to me!  and, since
then, sometimes more and sometimes less, i've be
 
 ___________________________
 
pt, and thus enlisted my informant among her
enemies, as securely as if she had done her some great wrong.  i had a
long talk with zillah about six weeks ago, a little before you came, one
day when we foregathered on the moor; and this is what she told me.

'the first thing mrs. linton did,' she said, 'on her arrival at the
heights, was to run up-stairs, without even wishing good-evening to me
and joseph; she shut herself into linton's room, and remained till
morning.  then, while the master and earnshaw were at breakfast, she
entered the house, and asked all in a quiver if the doctor might be sent
for? her cousin was very ill.

'"we know that!" answered heathcliff; "but his life is not worth a
farthing, and i won't spend a farthing on him."

'"but i cannot tell how to do," she said; "and if nobody will help me,
he'll die!"

'"walk out of the room," cried the master, "and let me never hear a word
more about him!  none here care what becomes of him; if you do, act the
nurse; if you do not, lock 
 
 ___________________________
 
?  she's as poor as you or i: poorer, i'll be bound: you're saying,
and i'm doing my little all that road.'

hareton allowed zillah to give him her aid; and she flattered him into a
good humour; so, when catherine came, half forgetting her former insults,
he tried to make himself agreeable, by the housekeeper's account.

'missis walked in,' she said, 'as chill as an icicle, and as high as a
princess.  i got up and offered her my seat in the arm-chair.  no, she
turned up her nose at my civility.  earnshaw rose, too, and bid her come
to the settle, and sit close by the fire: he was sure she was starved.

'"i've been starved a month and more," she answered, resting on the word
as scornful as she could.

'and she got a chair for herself, and placed it at a distance from both
of us.  having sat till she was warm, she began to look round, and
discovered a number of books on the dresser; she was instantly upon her
feet again, stretching to reach them: but they were too high up.  her
cousin, after watc
 
 ___________________________
 
 put
out his hand and stroked one curl, as gently as if it were a bird.  he
might have stuck a knife into her neck, she started round in such a
taking.

'"get away this moment!  how dare you touch me?  why are you stopping
there?" she cried, in a tone of disgust.  "i can't endure you!  i'll go
upstairs again, if you come near me."

'mr. hareton recoiled, looking as foolish as he could do: he sat down in
the settle very quiet, and she continued turning over her volumes another
half hour; finally, earnshaw crossed over, and whispered to me.

'"will you ask her to read to us, zillah?  i'm stalled of doing naught;
and i do like--i could like to hear her!  dunnot say i wanted it, but ask
of yourseln."

'"mr. hareton wishes you would read to us, ma'am," i said, immediately.
"he'd take it very kind--he'd be much obliged."

'she frowned; and looking up, answered--

'"mr. hareton, and the whole set of you, will be good enough to
understand that i reject any pretence at kindness you have the hypocrisy
to
 
 ___________________________
 
 offer!  i despise you, and will have nothing to say to any of you!
when i would have given my life for one kind word, even to see one of
your faces, you all kept off.  but i won't complain to you!  i'm driven
down here by the cold; not either to amuse you or enjoy your society."

'"what could i ha' done?" began earnshaw.  "how was i to blame?"

'"oh! you are an exception," answered mrs. heathcliff.  "i never missed
such a concern as you."

'"but i offered more than once, and asked," he said, kindling up at her
pertness, "i asked mr. heathcliff to let me wake for you--"

'"be silent!  i'll go out of doors, or anywhere, rather than have your
disagreeable voice in my ear!" said my lady.

'hareton muttered she might go to hell, for him! and unslinging his gun,
restrained himself from his sunday occupations no long
 
 ___________________________
 
never have been so steady.  i could; and i bit my lip in spite, at
having thrown away the chance i might have had of doing something besides
staring at its smiting beauty.

the task was done, not free from further blunders; but the pupil claimed
a reward, and received at least five kisses; which, however, he
generously returned.  then they came to the door, and from their
conversation i judged they were about to issue out and have a walk on the
moors.  i supposed i should be condemned in hareton earnshaw's heart, if
not by his mouth, to the lowest pit in the infernal regions if i showed
my unfortunate person in his neighbourhood then; and feeling very mean
and malignant, i skulked round to seek refuge in the kitchen.  there was
unobstructed admittance on that side also; and at the door sat my old
friend nelly dean, sewing and singing a song; which was often interrupted
from within by harsh words of scorn and intolerance, uttered in far from
musical accents.

'i'd rayther, by th' haulf, hev' 'em
 
 ___________________________
 
e,
the elder happily too deaf to understand her wicked nonsense, as he would
have called it, the younger doing his best to seem to disregard it.  on
fine evenings the latter followed his shooting expeditions, and catherine
yawned and sighed, and teased me to talk to her, and ran off into the
court or garden the moment i began; and, as a last resource, cried, and
said she was tired of living: her life was useless.

mr. heathcliff, who grew more and more disinclined to society, had almost
banished earnshaw from his apartment.  owing to an accident at the
commencement of march, he became for some days a fixture in the kitchen.
his gun burst while out on the hills by himself; a splinter cut his arm,
and he lost a good deal of blood before he could reach home.  the
consequence was that, perforce, he was condemned to the fireside and
tranquillity, till he made it up again.  it suited catherine to have him
there: at any rate, it made her hate her room up-stairs more than ever:
and she would compel me 
 
 ___________________________
 
to find out business below, that she might
accompany me.

on easter monday, joseph went to gimmerton fair with some cattle; and, in
the afternoon, i was busy getting up linen in the kitchen.  earnshaw sat,
morose as usual, at the chimney corner, and my little mistress was
beguiling an idle hour with drawing pictures on the window-panes, varying
her amusement by smothered bursts of songs, and whispered ejaculations,
and quick glances of annoyance and impatience in the direction of her
cousin, who steadfastly smoked, and looked into the grate.  at a notice
that i could do with her no longer intercepting my light, she removed to
the hearthstone.  i bestowed little attention on her proceedings, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed,
'since she repents of her sauciness.  it would do you a great deal of
good: it would make you another man to have her for a companion.'

'a companion!' he cried; 'when she hates me, and does not think me fit to
wipe her shoon!  nay, if it made me a king, i'd not be scorned for
seeking her good-will any more.'

'it is not i who hate you, it is you who hate me!' wept cathy, no longer
disguising her trouble.  'you hate me as much as mr. heathcliff does, and
more.'

'you're a damned liar,' began earnshaw: 'why have i made him angry, by
taking your part, then, a hundred times? and that when you sneered at and
despised me, and--go on plaguing me, and i'll step in yonder, and say you
worried me out of the kitchen!'

'i didn't know you took my part,' she answered, drying her eyes; 'and i
was miserable and bitter at everybody; but now i thank you, and beg you
to forgive me: what can i do besides?'

she returned to the hearth, and frankly extended her hand.  he blackened
and scowled like a thunder-cl
 
 ___________________________
 
! what should i have done, ellen?  he
wouldn't shake hands, and he wouldn't look: i must show him some way that
i like him--that i want to be friends.'

whether the kiss convinced hareton, i cannot tell: he was very careful,
for some minutes, that his face should not be seen, and when he did raise
it, he was sadly puzzled where to turn his eyes.

catherine employed herself in wrapping a handsome book neatly in white
paper, and having tied it with a bit of ribbon, and addressed it to 'mr.
hareton earnshaw,' she desired me to be her ambassadress, and convey the
present to its destined recipient.

'and tell him, if he'll take it, i'll come and teach him to read it
right,' she said; 'and, if he refuse it, i'll go upstairs, and never
tease him again.'

i carried it, and repeated the message; anxiously watched by my employer.
hareton would not open his fingers, so i laid it on his knee.  he did not
strike it off, either.  i returned to my work.  catherine leaned her head
and arms on the table, till s
 
 ___________________________
 
urther distinguishable talk, but, on looking round again,
i perceived two such radiant countenances bent over the page of the
accepted book, that i did not doubt the treaty had been ratified on both
sides; and the enemies were, thenceforth, sworn allies.

the work they studied was full of costly pictures; and those and their
position had charm enough to keep them unmoved till joseph came home.  he,
poor man, was perfectly aghast at the spectacle of catherine seated on
the same bench with hareton earnshaw, leaning her hand on his shoulder;
and confounded at his favourite's endurance of her proximity: it affected
him too deeply to allow an observation on the subject that night.  his
emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs he drew, as he solemnly
spread his large bible on the table, and overlaid it with dirty
bank-notes from his pocket-book, the produce of the day's transactions.
at length he summoned hareton from his seat.

'tak' these in to t' maister, lad,' he said, 'and bide there.  i's
 
 ___________________________
 
 to-morrow.'

'ony books that yah leave, i shall tak' into th' hahse,' said joseph,
'and it'll be mitch if yah find 'em agean; soa, yah may plase yerseln!'

cathy threatened that his library should pay for hers; and, smiling as
she passed hareton, went singing up-stairs: lighter of heart, i venture
to say, than ever she had been under that roof before; except, perhaps,
during her earliest visits to linton.

the intimacy thus commenced grew rapidly; though it encountered temporary
interruptions.  earnshaw was not to be civilized with a wish, and my
young lady was no philosopher, and no paragon of patience; but both their
minds tending to the same point--one loving and desiring to esteem, and
the other loving and desiring to be esteemed--they contrived in the end
to reach it.

you see, mr. lockwood, it was easy enough to win mrs. heathcliff's heart.
but now, i'm glad you did not try.  the crown of all my wishes will be
the union of those two.  i shall envy no one on their wedding day: there
won't
 
 ___________________________
 
 be a happier woman than myself in england!




chapter xxxiii


on the morrow of that monday, earnshaw being still unable to follow his
ordinary employments, and therefore remaining about the house, i speedily
found it would be impracticable to retain my charge beside me, as
heretofore.  she got downstairs before me, and out into the garden, where
she had seen her cousin performing some easy work; and when i went to bid
them come to breakfast, i saw she had persuaded him to clear a large
space of ground from currant and gooseberry bushes, and they were busy
planning together an importation of pl
 
 ___________________________
 
-currant trees were the apple of joseph's eye, and
she had just fixed her choice of a flower-bed in the midst of them.

'there!  that will be all shown to the master,' i exclaimed, 'the minute
it is discovered.  and what excuse have you to offer for taking such
liberties with the garden?  we shall have a fine explosion on the head of
it: see if we don't!  mr. hareton, i wonder you should have no more wit
than to go and make that mess at her bidding!'

'i'd forgotten they were joseph's,' answered earnshaw, rather puzzled;
'but i'll tell him i did it.'

we always ate our meals with mr. heathcliff.  i held the mistress's post
in making tea and carving; so i was indispensable at table.  catherine
usually sat by me, but to-day she stole nearer to hareton; and i
presently saw she would have no more discretion in her friendship than
she had in her hostility.

'now, mind you don't talk with and notice your cousin too much,' were my
whispered instructions as we entered the room.  'it will certainly anno
 
 ___________________________
 
to go.

'drag her away!' he cried, savagely.  'are you staying to talk?'  and he
approached to execute his own command.

'he'll not obey you, wicked man, any more,' said catherine; 'and he'll
soon detest you as much as i do.'

'wisht! wisht!' muttered the young man, reproachfully; 'i will not hear
you speak so to him.  have done.'

'but you won't let him strike me?' she cried.

'come, then,' he whispered earnestly.

it was too late: heathcliff had caught hold of her.

'now, _you_ go!' he said to earnshaw.  'accursed witch! this time she has
provoked me when i could not bear it; and i'll make her repent it for
ever!'

he had his hand in her hair; hareton attempted to release her locks,
entreating him not to hurt her that once.  heathcliff's black eyes
flashed; he seemed ready to tear catherine in pieces, and i was just
worked up to risk coming to the rescue, when of a sudden his fingers
relaxed; he shifted his grasp from her head to her arm, and gazed
intently in her face.  then he drew his hand
 
 ___________________________
 
on sternly check his cousin, on her offering
a revelation of her father-in-law's conduct to his father.  he said he
wouldn't suffer a word to be uttered in his disparagement: if he were the
devil, it didn't signify; he would stand by him; and he'd rather she
would abuse himself, as she used to, than begin on mr. heathcliff.
catherine was waxing cross at this; but he found means to make her hold
her tongue, by asking how she would like _him_ to speak ill of her
father?  then she comprehended that earnshaw took the master's reputation
home to himself; and was attached by ties stronger than reason could
break--chains, forged by habit, which it would be cruel to attempt to
loosen.  she showed a good heart, thenceforth, in avoiding both
complaints and expressions of antipathy concerning heathcliff; and
confessed to me her sorrow that she had endeavoured to raise a bad spirit
between him and hareton: indeed, i don't believe she has ever breathed a
syllable, in the latter's hearing, against her oppres
 
 ___________________________
 
 burning
shame to scold them.  the red fire-light glowed on their two bonny heads,
and revealed their faces animated with the eager interest of children;
for, though he was twenty-three and she eighteen, each had so much of
novelty to feel and learn, that neither experienced nor evinced the
sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity.

they lifted their eyes together, to encounter mr. heathcliff: perhaps you
have never remarked that their eyes are precisely similar, and they are
those of catherine earnshaw.  the present catherine has no other likeness
to her, except a breadth of forehead, and a certain arch of the nostril
that makes her appear rather haughty, whether she will or not.  with
hareton the resemblance is carried farther: it is singular at all times,
_then_ it was particularly striking; because his senses were alert, and
his mental faculties wakened to unwonted activity.  i suppose this
resemblance disarmed mr. heathcliff: he walked to the hearth in evident
agitation; but it quickly su