swered again.

desiring to have his reasons for liking him, i could only gather the
sentences--'i known't: he pays dad back what he gies to me--he curses
daddy for cursing me.  he says i mun do as i will.'

'and the curate does not teach you to read and write, then?' i pursued.

'no, i was told the curate should have his--teeth dashed down his--throat,
if he stepped over the threshold--heathcliff had promised that!'

i put the orange in his hand, and bade him tell his father that a woman
called nelly dean was waiting to speak with him, by the garden gate.  he
went up the walk, and entered the house; but, instead of hindley,
heathcliff appeared on the door-stones; and i turned directly and ran
down the road as hard as ever i could race, making no halt till i gained
the guide-post, and feeling as scared as if i had raised a goblin.  this
is not much connected with miss isabella's affair: except that it urged
me to resolve further on mounting vigilant guard, and doing my utmost to
check the spread 
 
 ___________________________
 
 circumstance a thought:
though it was a strange sound, in that place, at two o'clock in the
morning.

mr. kenneth was fortunately just issuing from his house to see a patient
in the village as i came up the street; and my account of catherine
linton's malady induced him to accompany me back immediately.  he was a
plain rough man; and he made no scruple to speak his doubts of her
surviving this second attack; unless she were more submissive to his
directions than she had shown herself before.

'nelly dean,' said he, 'i can't help fancying there's an extra cause for
this.  what has there been to do at the grange?  we've odd reports up
here.  a stout, hearty lass like catherine does not fall ill for a
trifle; and that sort of people should not either.  it's hard work
bringing them through fevers, and such things.  how did it begin?'

'the master will inform you,' i answered; 'but you are acquainted with
the earnshaws' violent dispositions, and mrs. linton caps them all.  i
may say this; it commenc
 
 ___________________________
 
 bare!'

'what do you mean?' asked zillah.  'it's not his tale: they tell that in
the village--about your being lost in the marsh; and i calls to earnshaw,
when i come in--"eh, they's queer things, mr. hareton, happened since i
went off.  it's a sad pity of that likely young lass, and cant nelly
dean."  he stared.  i thought he had not heard aught, so i told him the
rumour.  the master listened, and he just smiled to himself, and said,
"if they have been in the marsh, they are out now, zillah.  nelly dean is
lodged, at this minute, in your room.  you can tell her to flit, when you
go up; here is the key.  the bog-water got into her head, and she would
have run home quite flighty; but i fixed her till she came round to her
senses.  you can bid her go to the grange at once, if she be able, and
carry a message from me, that her young lady will follow in time to
attend the squire's funeral."'

'mr. edgar is not dead?' i gasped.  'oh! zillah, zillah!'

'no, no; sit you down, my good mistress,' she re
 
 ___________________________
 
ously returned.  then they came to the door, and from their
conversation i judged they were about to issue out and have a walk on the
moors.  i supposed i should be condemned in hareton earnshaw's heart, if
not by his mouth, to the lowest pit in the infernal regions if i showed
my unfortunate person in his neighbourhood then; and feeling very mean
and malignant, i skulked round to seek refuge in the kitchen.  there was
unobstructed admittance on that side also; and at the door sat my old
friend nelly dean, sewing and singing a song; which was often interrupted
from within by harsh words of scorn and intolerance, uttered in far from
musical accents.

'i'd rayther, by th' haulf, hev' 'em swearing i' my lugs fro'h morn to
neeght, nor hearken ye hahsiver!' said the tenant of the kitchen, in
answer to an unheard speech of nelly's.  'it's a blazing shame, that i
cannot oppen t' blessed book, but yah set up them glories to sattan, and
all t' flaysome wickednesses that iver were born into th' warld!  oh