at, instead of a wild, hatless
little savage jumping into the house, and rushing to squeeze us all
breathless, there 'lighted from a handsome black pony a very dignified
person, with brown ringlets falling from the cover of a feathered beaver,
and a long cloth habit, which she was obliged to hold up with both hands
that she might sail in.  hindley lifted her from her horse, exclaiming
delightedly, 'why, cathy, you are quite a beauty!  i should scarcely have
known you: you look like a lady now.  isabella linton is not to be
compared with her, is she, frances?'  'isabella has not her natural
advantages,' replied his wife: 'but she must mind and not grow wild again
here.  ellen, help miss catherine off with her things--stay, dear, you
will disarrange your curls--let me untie your hat.'

i removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath a grand plaid silk
frock, white trousers, and burnished shoes; and, while her eyes sparkled
joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to welcome her, she dared hardly
touc
 
 ___________________________
 
nd gratified to see what a forbidding young blackguard he
would be compelled to present himself.  'you may come and wish miss
catherine welcome, like the other servants.'

cathy, catching a glimpse of her friend in his concealment, flew to
embrace him; she bestowed seven or eight kisses on his cheek within the
second, and then stopped, and drawing back, burst into a laugh,
exclaiming, 'why, how very black and cross you look! and how--how funny
and grim!  but that's because i'm used to edgar and isabella linton.
well, heathcliff, have you forgotten me?'

she had some reason to put the question, for shame and pride threw double
gloom over his countenance, and kept him immovable.

'shake hands, heathcliff,' said mr. earnshaw, condescendingly; 'once in a
way that is permitted.'

'i shall not,' replied the boy, finding his tongue at last; 'i shall not
stand to be laughed at.  i shall not bear it!'  and he would have broken
from the circle, but miss cathy seized him again.

'i did not mean to laugh at you,
 
 ___________________________
 
s gushed over them.  she slipped her fork to the
floor, and hastily dived under the cloth to conceal her emotion.  i did
not call her unfeeling long; for i perceived she was in purgatory
throughout the day, and wearying to find an opportunity of getting by
herself, or paying a visit to heathcliff, who had been locked up by the
master: as i discovered, on endeavouring to introduce to him a private
mess of victuals.

in the evening we had a dance.  cathy begged that he might be liberated
then, as isabella linton had no partner: her entreaties were vain, and i
was appointed to supply the deficiency.  we got rid of all gloom in the
excitement of the exercise, and our pleasure was increased by the arrival
of the gimmerton band, mustering fifteen strong: a trumpet, a trombone,
clarionets, bassoons, french horns, and a bass viol, besides singers.
they go the rounds of all the respectable houses, and receive
contributions every christmas, and we esteemed it a first-rate treat to
hear them.  after the usual c
 
 ___________________________
 
s intrusion.  catherine, also, deemed it
judicious to moderate her expressions of pleasure in receiving him; and
he gradually established his right to be expected.  he retained a great
deal of the reserve for which his boyhood was remarkable; and that served
to repress all startling demonstrations of feeling.  my master's
uneasiness experienced a lull, and further circumstances diverted it into
another channel for a space.

his new source of trouble sprang from the not anticipated misfortune of
isabella linton evincing a sudden and irresistible attraction towards the
tolerated guest.  she was at that time a charming young lady of eighteen;
infantile in manners, though possessed of keen wit, keen feelings, and a
keen temper, too, if irritated.  her brother, who loved her tenderly, was
appalled at this fantastic preference.  leaving aside the degradation of
an alliance with a nameless man, and the possible fact that his property,
in default of heirs male, might pass into such a one's power, he had
sens
 
 ___________________________
 
n's.'

'delectably!' observed catherine.  'they are dove's eyes--angel's!'

'she's her brother's heir, is she not?' he asked, after a brief silence.

'i should be sorry to think so,' returned his companion.  'half a dozen
nephews shall erase her title, please heaven!  abstract your mind from
the subject at present: you are too prone to covet your neighbour's
goods; remember _this_ neighbour's goods are mine.'

'if they were _mine_, they would be none the less that,' said heathcliff;
'but though isabella linton may be silly, she is scarcely mad; and, in
short, we'll dismiss the matter, as you advise.'

from their tongues they did dismiss it; and catherine, probably, from her
thoughts.  the other, i felt certain, recalled it often in the course of
the evening.  i saw him smile to himself--grin rather--and lapse into
ominous musing whenever mrs. linton had occasion to be absent from the
apartment.

i determined to watch his movements.  my heart invariably cleaved to the
master's, in preference to cather
 
 ___________________________
 
yard, and through a wicket, to another door, at which
i took the liberty of knocking, in hopes some more civil servant might
show himself.  after a short suspense, it was opened by a tall, gaunt
man, without neckerchief, and otherwise extremely slovenly; his features
were lost in masses of shaggy hair that hung on his shoulders; and _his_
eyes, too, were like a ghostly catherine's with all their beauty
annihilated.

'what's your business here?' he demanded, grimly.  'who are you?'

'my name was isabella linton,' i replied.  'you've seen me before, sir.
i'm lately married to mr. heathcliff, and he has brought me here--i
suppose, by your permission.'

'is he come back, then?' asked the hermit, glaring like a hungry wolf.

'yes--we came just now,' i said; 'but he left me by the kitchen door; and
when i would have gone in, your little boy played sentinel over the
place, and frightened me off by the help of a bull-dog.'

'it's well the hellish villain has kept his word!' growled my future
host, searching 