rves and brain.  this caused me to
feel, not uncomfortable, but rather fearful (as i am still) of serious
effects from the incidents of to-day and yesterday.  she returned
presently, bringing a smoking basin and a basket of work; and, having
placed the former on the hob, drew in her seat, evidently pleased to find
me so companionable.

before i came to live here, she commenced--waiting no farther invitation
to her story--i was almost always at wuthering heights; because my mother
had nursed mr. hindley earnshaw, that was hareton's father, and i got
used to playing with the children: i ran errands too, and helped to make
hay, and hung about the farm ready for anything that anybody would set me
to.  one fine summer morning--it was the beginning of harvest, i
remember--mr. earnshaw, the old master, came down-stairs, dressed for a
journey; and, after he had told joseph what was to be done during the
day, he turned to hindley, and cathy, and me--for i sat eating my
porridge with them--and he said, speaking
 
 ___________________________
 
 could
stammer a word or totter a step it wielded a despot's sceptre in his
heart.  it was named catherine; but he never called it the name in full,
as he had never called the first catherine short: probably because
heathcliff had a habit of doing so.  the little one was always cathy: it
formed to him a distinction from the mother, and yet a connection with
her; and his attachment sprang from its relation to her, far more than
from its being his own.

i used to draw a comparison between him and hindley earnshaw, and perplex
myself to explain satisfactorily why their conduct was so opposite in
similar circumstances.  they had both been fond husbands, and were both
attached to their children; and i could not see how they shouldn't both
have taken the same road, for good or evil.  but, i thought in my mind,
hindley, with apparently the stronger head, has shown himself sadly the
worse and the weaker man.  when his ship struck, the captain abandoned
his post; and the crew, instead of trying to save her, ru
 
 ___________________________
 
ink?'

'who?' i asked in a flurry.

'why, guess!' he returned, dismounting, and slinging his bridle on a hook
by the door.  'and nip up the corner of your apron: i'm certain you'll
need it.'

'not mr. heathcliff, surely?' i exclaimed.

'what! would you have tears for him?' said the doctor.  'no, heathcliff's
a tough young fellow: he looks blooming to-day.  i've just seen him.  he's
rapidly regaining flesh since he lost his better half.'

'who is it, then, mr. kenneth?' i repeated impatiently.

'hindley earnshaw!  your old friend hindley,' he replied, 'and my wicked
gossip: though he's been too wild for me this long while.  there!  i said
we should draw water.  but cheer up!  he died true to his character:
drunk as a lord.  poor lad!  i'm sorry, too.  one can't help missing an
old companion: though he had the worst tricks with him that ever man
imagined, and has done me many a rascally turn.  he's barely
twenty-seven, it seems; that's your own age: who would have thought you
were born in one year?'

i 