ity and suspicions were roused; i determined to
take a peep at her mysterious treasures; so, at night, as soon as she and
my master were safe upstairs, i searched, and readily found among my
house keys one that would fit the lock.  having opened, i emptied the
whole contents into my apron, and took them with me to examine at leisure
in my own chamber.  though i could not but suspect, i was still surprised
to discover that they were a mass of correspondence--daily almost, it
must have been--from linton heathcliff: answers to documents forwarded by
her.  the earlier dated were embarrassed and short; gradually, however,
they expanded into copious love-letters, foolish, as the age of the
writer rendered natural, yet with touches here and there which i thought
were borrowed from a more experienced source.  some of them struck me as
singularly odd compounds of ardour and flatness; commencing in strong
feeling, and concluding in the affected, wordy style that a schoolboy
might use to a fancied, incorporeal sw
 
 ___________________________
 
isturb him, after his daughter's arrival.

mr. green took upon himself to order everything and everybody about the
place.  he gave all the servants but me, notice to quit.  he would have
carried his delegated authority to the point of insisting that edgar
linton should not be buried beside his wife, but in the chapel, with his
family.  there was the will, however, to hinder that, and my loud
protestations against any infringement of its directions.  the funeral
was hurried over; catherine, mrs. linton heathcliff now, was suffered to
stay at the grange till her father's corpse had quitted it.

she told me that her anguish had at last spurred linton to incur the risk
of liberating her.  she heard the men i sent disputing at the door, and
she gathered the sense of heathcliff's answer.  it drove her desperate.
linton who had been conveyed up to the little parlour soon after i left,
was terrified into fetching the key before his father re-ascended.  he
had the cunning to unlock and re-lock the door, without
 
 ___________________________
 
nd hareton,
absolutely dumb, on the other, i made a somewhat cheerless meal, and bade
adieu early.  i would have departed by the back way, to get a last
glimpse of catherine and annoy old joseph; but hareton received orders to
lead up my horse, and my host himself escorted me to the door, so i could
not fulfil my wish.

'how dreary life gets over in that house!' i reflected, while riding down
the road.  'what a realisation of something more romantic than a fairy
tale it would have been for mrs. linton heathcliff, had she and i struck
up an attachment, as her good nurse desired, and migrated together into
the stirring atmosphere of the town!'




chapter xxxii


1802.--this september i was invited to devastate the moors of a friend in
the north, and on my journey to his abode, i unexpectedly came within
fifteen miles of gimmerton.  the ostler at a roadside public-house was
holding a pail of water to refresh my horses, when a cart of very green
oats, newly reaped, passed by, and he remarked,--'yon's frou