lk in' was uttered with closed teeth, and expressed the sentiment,
'go to the deuce:' even the gate over which he leant manifested no
sympathising movement to the words; and i think that circumstance
determined me to accept the invitation: i felt interested in a man who
seemed more exaggeratedly reserved than myself.

when he saw my horse's breast fairly pushing the barrier, he did put out
his hand to unchain it, and then sullenly preceded me up the causeway,
calling, as we entered the court,--'joseph, take mr. lockwood's horse;
and bring up some wine.'

'here we have the whole establishment of domestics, i suppose,' was the
reflection suggested by this compound order.  'no wonder the grass grows
up between the flags, and cattle are the only hedge-cutters.'

joseph was an elderly, nay, an old man: very old, perhaps, though hale
and sinewy.  'the lord help us!' he soliloquised in an undertone of
peevish displeasure, while relieving me of my horse: looking, meantime,
in my face so sourly that 
 
 ___________________________
 
and filled up an interval of silence by attempting
to caress the canine mother, who had left her nursery, and was sneaking
wolfishly to the back of my legs, her lip curled up, and her white teeth
watering for a snatch.  my caress provoked a long, guttural gnarl.

'you'd better let the dog alone,' growled mr. heathcliff in unison,
checking fiercer demonstrations with a punch of his foot.  'she's not
accustomed to be spoiled--not kept for a pet.'  then, striding to a side
door, he shouted again, 'joseph!'

joseph mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar, but gave no
intimation of ascending; so his master dived down to him, leaving me
_vis-a-vis_ the ruffianly bitch and a pair of grim shaggy sheep-dogs,
who shared with her a jealous guardianship over all my movements. not
anxious to come in contact with their fangs, i sat still; but, imagining
they would scarcely understand tacit insults, i unfortunately indulged
in winking and making faces at the trio, and some turn of my physiognomy
s
 
 ___________________________
 
  being unable to remove the chain, i
jumped over, and, running up the flagged causeway bordered with
straggling gooseberry-bushes, knocked vainly for admittance, till my
knuckles tingled and the dogs howled.

'wretched inmates!' i ejaculated, mentally, 'you deserve perpetual
isolation from your species for your churlish inhospitality. at least, i
would not keep my doors barred in the day-time. i don't care--i will get
in!' so resolved, i grasped the latch and shook it vehemently.
vinegar-faced joseph projected his head from a round window of the barn.

'what are ye for?' he shouted.  't' maister's down i' t' fowld.  go round
by th' end o' t' laith, if ye went to spake to him.'

'is there nobody inside to open the door?' i hallooed, responsively.

'there's nobbut t' missis; and shoo'll not oppen 't an ye mak' yer
flaysome dins till neeght.'

'why?  cannot you tell her whom i am, eh, joseph?'

'nor-ne me!  i'll hae no hend wi't,' muttered the head, vanishing.

the snow began to drive thickly.
 
 ___________________________
 
ffocating snow.

'i don't think it possible for me to get home now without a guide,' i
could not help exclaiming.  'the roads will be buried already; and, if
they were bare, i could scarcely distinguish a foot in advance.'

'hareton, drive those dozen sheep into the barn porch.  they'll be
covered if left in the fold all night: and put a plank before them,' said
heathcliff.

'how must i do?' i continued, with rising irritation.

there was no reply to my question; and on looking round i saw only joseph
bringing in a pail of porridge for the dogs, and mrs. heathcliff leaning
over the fire, diverting herself with burning a bundle of matches which
had fallen from the chimney-piece as she restored the tea-canister to its
place.  the former, when he had deposited his burden, took a critical
survey of the room, and in cracked tones grated out--'aw wonder how yah
can faishion to stand thear i' idleness un war, when all on 'ems goan
out!  bud yah're a nowt, and it's no use talking--yah'll niver mend 
 
 ___________________________
 
other afore ye!'

i imagined, for a moment, that this piece of eloquence was addressed to
me; and, sufficiently enraged, stepped towards the aged rascal with an
intention of kicking him out of the door.  mrs. heathcliff, however,
checked me by her answer.

'you scandalous old hypocrite!' she replied.  'are you not afraid of
being carried away bodily, whenever you mention the devil's name?  i warn
you to refrain from provoking me, or i'll ask your abduction as a special
favour!  stop! look here, joseph,' she continued, taking a long, dark
book from a shelf; 'i'll show you how far i've progressed in the black
art: i shall soon be competent to make a clear house of it.  the red cow
didn't die by chance; and your rheumatism can hardly be reckoned among
providential visitations!'

'oh, wicked, wicked!' gasped the elder; 'may the lord deliver us from
evil!'

'no, reprobate! you are a castaway--be off, or i'll hurt you seriously!
i'll have you all modelled in wax and clay! and the first who passes 
 
 ___________________________
 
the
limits i fix shall--i'll not say what he shall be done to--but, you'll
see!  go, i'm looking at you!'

the little witch put a mock malignity into her beautiful eyes, and
joseph, trembling with sincere horror, hurried out, praying, and
ejaculating 'wicked' as he went.  i thought her conduct must be prompted
by a species of dreary fun; and, now that we were alone, i endeavoured to
interest her in my distress.

'mrs. heathcliff,' i said earnestly, 'you must excuse me for troubling
you.  i presume, because, with that face, i'm sure you cannot help being
good-hearted.  do point out some landmarks by which i may know my way
home: i have no more idea how to get there than yo
 
 ___________________________
 
an give.'

'then, if you hear of me being discovered dead in a bog or a pit full of
snow, your conscience won't whisper that it is partly your fault?'

'how so?  i cannot escort you.  they wouldn't let me go to the end of the
garden wall.'

'_you_!  i should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold, for my
convenience, on such a night,' i cried.  'i want you to tell me my way,
not to _show_ it: or else to persuade mr. heathcliff to give me a guide.'

'who?  there is himself, earnshaw, zillah, joseph and i.  which would you
have?'

'are there no boys at the farm?'

'no; those are all.'

'then, it follows that i am compelled to stay.'

'that you may settle with your host.  i have nothing to do with it.'

'i hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more rash journeys on these
hills,' cried heathcliff's stern voice from the kitchen entrance.  'as to
staying here, i don't keep accommodations for visitors: you must share a
bed with hareton or joseph, if you do.'

'i can sleep on a chair in thi
 
 ___________________________
 
he bore.  'and who is to look after the horses, eh?'

'a man's life is of more consequence than one evening's neglect of the
horses: somebody must go,' murmured mrs. heathcliff, more kindly than i
expected.

'not at your command!' retorted hareton.  'if you set store on him, you'd
better be quiet.'

'then i hope his ghost will haunt you; and i hope mr. heathcliff will
never get another tenant till the grange is a ruin,' she answered,
sharply.

'hearken, hearken, shoo's cursing on 'em!' muttered joseph, towards whom
i had been steering.

he sat within earshot, milking the cows by the light of a lantern, which
i seized unceremoniously, and, calling out that i would send it back on
the morrow, rushed to the nearest postern.

'maister, maister, he's staling t' lanthern!' shouted the ancient,
pursuing my retreat.  'hey, gnasher!  hey, dog!  hey wolf, holld him,
holld him!'

on opening the little door, two hairy monsters flew at my throat, bearing
me down, and extinguishing the light; while a ming
 
 ___________________________
 
n proved it to have been well used, though not altogether for
a legitimate purpose: scarcely one chapter had escaped, a pen-and-ink
commentary--at least the appearance of one--covering every morsel of
blank that the printer had left.  some were detached sentences; other
parts took the form of a regular diary, scrawled in an unformed, childish
hand.  at the top of an extra page (quite a treasure, probably, when
first lighted on) i was greatly amused to behold an excellent caricature
of my friend joseph,--rudely, yet powerfully sketched.  an immediate
interest kindled within me for the unknown catherine, and i began
forthwith to decipher her faded hieroglyphics.

'an awful sunday,' commenced the paragraph beneath.  'i wish my father
were back again.  hindley is a detestable substitute--his conduct to
heathcliff is atrocious--h. and i are going to rebel--we took our
initiatory step this evening.

'all day had been flooding with rain; we could not go to church, so
joseph must needs get up a cong
 
 ___________________________
 
regation in the garret; and, while hindley
and his wife basked downstairs before a comfortable fire--doing anything
but reading their bibles, i'll answer for it--heathcliff, myself, and the
unhappy ploughboy were commanded to take our prayer-books, and mount: we
were ranged in a row, on a sack of corn, groaning and shivering, and
hoping that joseph would shiver too, so that he might give us a short
homily for his own sake.  a vain idea!  the service lasted precisely
three hours; and yet my brother had the face to exclaim, when he saw us
descending, "what, done already?"  on sunday evenings we used to be
permitted to play, if we did not make much noise; now a mere titter is
sufficient to send us into corners.

'"you forget you have a master here," says the tyrant.  "i'll demolish
the first who puts me out of temper!  i insist on perfect so
 
 ___________________________
 
y and
silence.  oh, boy! was that you?  frances darling, pull his hair as you
go by: i heard him snap his fingers."  frances pulled his hair heartily,
and then went and seated herself on her husband's knee, and there they
were, like two babies, kissing and talking nonsense by the hour--foolish
palaver that we should be ashamed of.  we made ourselves as snug as our
means allowed in the arch of the dresser.  i had just fastened our
pinafores together, and hung them up for a curtain, when in comes joseph,
on an errand from the stables.  he tears down my handiwork, boxes my
ears, and croaks:

'"t' maister nobbut just buried, and sabbath not o'ered, und t' sound o'
t' gospel still i' yer lugs, and ye darr be laiking!  shame on ye! sit ye
down, ill childer! there's good books eneugh if ye'll read 'em: sit ye
down, and think o' yer sowls!"

'saying this, he compelled us so to square our positions that we might
receive from the far-off fire a dull ray to show us the text of the
lumber he thrust upon
 
 ___________________________
 
as a hubbub!

'"maister hindley!" shouted our chaplain.  "maister, coom hither!  miss
cathy's riven th' back off 'th' helmet o' salvation,' un' heathcliff's
pawsed his fit into t' first part o' 't' brooad way to destruction!'  it's
fair flaysome that ye let 'em go on this gait.  ech! th' owd man wad ha'
laced 'em properly--but he's goan!"

'hindley hurried up from his paradise on the hearth, and seizing one of
us by the collar, and the other by the arm, hurled both into the
back-kitchen; where, joseph asseverated, "owd nick" would fetch us as
sure as we were living: and, so comforted, we each sought a separate
nook to await his advent. i reached this book, and a pot of ink from a
shelf, and pushed the house-door ajar to give me light, and i have got
the time on with writing for twenty minutes; but my companion is
impatient, and proposes that we should appropriate the dairywoman's
cloak, and have a scamper on the moors, under its shelter. a pleasant
suggestion--and then, if the surly old man 
 
 ___________________________
 
h.'  and while
i was, half-consciously, worrying my brain to guess what jabez branderham
would make of his subject, i sank back in bed, and fell asleep.  alas,
for the effects of bad tea and bad temper!  what else could it be that
made me pass such a terrible night?  i don't remember another that i can
at all compare with it since i was capable of suffering.

i began to dream, almost before i ceased to be sensible of my locality.  i
thought it was morning; and i had set out on my way home, with joseph for
a guide.  the snow lay yards deep in our road; and, as we floundered on,
my companion wearied me with constant reproaches that i had not brought a
pilgrim's staff: telling me that i could never get into the house without
one, and boastfully flourishing a heavy-headed cudgel, which i understood
to be so denominated.  for a moment i considered it absurd that i should
need such a weapon to gain admittance into my own residence.  then a new
idea flashed across me.  i was not going there: we wer
 
 ___________________________
 
e journeying to
hear the famous jabez branderham preach, from the text--'seventy times
seven;' and either joseph, the preacher, or i had committed the 'first of
the seventy-first,' and were to be publicly exposed and excommunicated.

we came to the chapel.  i have passed it really in my walks, twice or
thrice; it lies in a hollow, between two hills: an elevated hollow, near
a swamp, whose peaty moisture is said to answer all the purposes of
embalming on the few corpses deposited there.  the roof has been kept
whole hitherto; but as the clergyman's stipend is only twenty pounds per
annum, and a house with 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the pulpit, and each discussing a
separate sin!  where he searched for them, i cannot tell.  he had his
private manner of interpreting the phrase, and it seemed necessary the
brother should sin different sins on every occasion.  they were of the
most curious character: odd transgressions that i never imagined
previously.

oh, how weary i grow.  how i writhed, and yawned, and nodded, and
revived!  how i pinched and pricked myself, and rubbed my eyes, and stood
up, and sat down again, and nudged joseph to inform me if he would _ever_
have done.  i was condemned to hear all out: finally, he reached the
'_first of the seventy-first_.'  at that crisis, a sudden inspiration
descended on me; i was moved to rise and denounce jabez branderham as the
sinner of the sin that no christian need pardon.

'sir,' i exclaimed, 'sitting here within these four walls, at one
stretch, i have endured and forgiven the four hundred and ninety heads of
your discourse.  seventy times seven times have i plucked up my 
 
 ___________________________
 
er his
cushion.  'seventy times seven times didst thou gapingly contort thy
visage--seventy times seven did i take counsel with my soul--lo, this is
human weakness: this also may be absolved!  the first of the
seventy-first is come.  brethren, execute upon him the judgment written.
such honour have all his saints!'

with that concluding word, the whole assembly, exalting their pilgrim's
staves, rushed round me in a body; and i, having no weapon to raise in
self-defence, commenced grappling with joseph, my nearest and most
ferocious assailant, for his.  in the confluence of the multitude,
several clubs crossed; blows, aimed at me, fell on other sconces.
presently the whole chapel resounded with rappings and counter rappings:
every man's hand was against his neighbour; and branderham, unwilling to
remain idle, poured forth his zeal in a shower of loud taps on the boards
of the pulpit, which responded so smartly that, at last, to my
unspeakable relief, they woke me.  and what was it that had su
 
 ___________________________
 
n.  i descended cautiously to the lower regions, and landed
in the back-kitchen, where a gleam of fire, raked compactly together,
enabled me to rekindle my candle.  nothing was stirring except a
brindled, grey cat, which crept from the ashes, and saluted me with a
querulous mew.

two benches, shaped in sections of a circle, nearly enclosed the hearth;
on one of these i stretched myself, and grimalkin mounted the other.  we
were both of us nodding ere any one invaded our retreat, and then it was
joseph, shuffling down a wooden ladder that vanished in the roof, through
a trap: the ascent to his garret, i suppose.  he cast a sinister look at
the little flame which i had enticed to play between the ribs, swept the
cat from its elevation, and bestowing himself in the vacancy, commenced
the operation of stuffing a three-inch pipe with tobacco.  my presence in
his sanctum was evidently esteemed a piece of impudence too shameful for
remark: he silently applied the tube to his lips, folded his arms, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ommenced--waiting no farther invitation
to her story--i was almost always at wuthering heights; because my mother
had nursed mr. hindley earnshaw, that was hareton's father, and i got
used to playing with the children: i ran errands too, and helped to make
hay, and hung about the farm ready for anything that anybody would set me
to.  one fine summer morning--it was the beginning of harvest, i
remember--mr. earnshaw, the old master, came down-stairs, dressed for a
journey; and, after he had told joseph what was to be done during the
day, he turned to hindley, and cathy, and me--for i sat eating my
porridge with them--and he said, speaking to his son, 'now, my bonny man,
i'm going to liverpool to-day, what shall i bring you?  you may choose
what you like: only let it be little, for i shall walk there and back:
sixty miles each way, that is a long spell!'  hindley named a fiddle, and
then he asked miss cathy; she was hardly six years old, but she could
ride any horse in the stable, and she chos
 
 ___________________________
 
haw agreed, though with a heavy spirit, for he said--'hindley was
nought, and would never thrive as where he wandered.'

i hoped heartily we should have peace now.  it hurt me to think the
master should be made uncomfortable by his own good deed.  i fancied the
discontent of age and disease arose from his family disagreements; as he
would have it that it did: really, you know, sir, it was in his sinking
frame.  we might have got on tolerably, notwithstanding, but for two
people--miss cathy, and joseph, the servant: you saw him, i daresay, up
yonder.  he was, and is yet most likely, the wearisomest self-righteous
pharisee that ever ransacked a bible to rake the promises to himself and
fling the curses to his neighbours.  by his knack of sermonising and
pious discoursing, he contrived to make a great impression on mr.
earnshaw; and the more feeble the master became, the more influence he
gained.  he was relentless in worrying him about his soul's concerns, and
about ruling his children rigidly
 
 ___________________________
 
g and ordering; and so i let her know.

now, mr. earnshaw did not understand jokes from his children: he had
always been strict and grave with them; and catherine, on her part, had
no idea why her father should be crosser and less patient in his ailing
condition than he was in his prime.  his peevish reproofs wakened in her
a naughty delight to provoke him: she was never so happy as when we were
all scolding her at once, and she defying us with her bold, saucy look,
and her ready words; turning joseph's religious curses into ridicule,
baiting me, and doing just what her father hated most--showing how her
pretended insolence, which he thought real, had more power over
heathcliff than his kindness: how the boy would do _her_ bidding in
anything, and _his_ only when it suited his own inclination.  after
behaving as badly as possible all day, she sometimes came fondling to
make it up at night.  'nay, cathy,' the old man would say, 'i cannot love
thee, thou'rt worse than thy brother.  go, say thy
 
 ___________________________
 
irst; and then being repulsed continually
hardened her, and she laughed if i told her to say she was sorry for her
faults, and beg to be forgiven.

but the hour came, at last, that ended mr. earnshaw's troubles on earth.
he died quietly in his chair one october evening, seated by the
fire-side.  a high wind blustered round the house, and roared in the
chimney: it sounded wild and stormy, yet it was not cold, and we were all
together--i, a little removed from the hearth, busy at my knitting, and
joseph reading his bible near the table (for the servants generally sat
in the house then, after their work was done).  miss cathy had been sick,
and that made her still; she leant against her father's knee, and
heathcliff was lying on the floor with his head in her lap.  i remember
the master, before he fell into a doze, stroking her bonny hair--it
pleased him rarely to see her gentle--and saying, 'why canst thou not
always be a good lass, cathy?'  and she turned her face up to his, and
laughed, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
answered, 'why cannot you always be a good man, father?'  but
as soon as she saw him vexed again, she kissed his hand, and said she
would sing him to sleep.  she began singing very low, till his fingers
dropped from hers, and his head sank on his breast.  then i told her to
hush, and not stir, for fear she should wake him.  we all kept as mute as
mice a full half-hour, and should have done so longer, only joseph,
having finished his chapter, got up and said that he must rouse the
master for prayers and bed.  he stepped forward, and called him by name,
and touched his shoulder; but he would not move: so he took the candle
and looked at him.  i thought there was something wrong as he set down
the light; and seizing the children each by an arm, whispered them to
'frame up-stairs, and make little din--they might pray alone that
evening--he had summut to do.'

'i shall bid father good-night first,' said cat
 
 ___________________________
 
herine, putting her arms
round his neck, before we could hinder her.  the poor thing discovered
her loss directly--she screamed out--'oh, he's dead, heathcliff! he's
dead!'  and they both set up a heart-breaking cry.

i joined my wail to theirs, loud and bitter; but joseph asked what we
could be thinking of to roar in that way over a saint in heaven.  he told
me to put on my cloak and run to gimmerton for the doctor and the parson.
i could not guess the use that either would be of, then.  however, i
went, through wind and rain, and brought one, the doctor, back with me;
the other said he would come in the morning.  leaving joseph to explain
matters, i ran to the children's room: their door was ajar, i saw they
had never lain down, though it was past midnight; but
 
 ___________________________
 
very quick; that the least sudden noise set
her all in a quiver, and that she coughed troublesomely sometimes: but i
knew nothing of what these symptoms portended, and had no impulse to
sympathise with her.  we don't in general take to foreigners here, mr.
lockwood, unless they take to us first.

young earnshaw was altered considerably in the three years of his
absence. he had grown sparer, and lost his colour, and spoke and dressed
quite differently; and, on the very day of his return, he told joseph
and me we must thenceforth quarter ourselves in the back-kitchen, and
leave the house for him. indeed, he would have carpeted and papered a
small spare room for a parlour; but his wife expressed such pleasure at
the white floor and huge glowing fireplace, at the pewter dishes and
delf-case, and dog-kennel, and the wide space there was to move about in
where they usually sat, that he thought it unnecessary to her comfort,
and so dropped the intention.

she expressed pleasure, too, at finding a s
 
 ___________________________
 
te, and insisted that he should labour out of
doors instead; compelling him to do so as hard as any other lad on the
farm.

heathcliff bore his degradation pretty well at first, because cathy
taught him what she learnt, and worked or played with him in the fields.
they both promised fair to grow up as rude as savages; the young master
being entirely negligent how they behaved, and what they did, so they
kept clear of him.  he would not even have seen after their going to
church on sundays, only joseph and the curate reprimanded his
carelessness when they absented themselves; and that reminded him to
order heathcliff a flogging, and catherine a fast from dinner or supper.
but it was one of their chief amusements to run away to the moors in the
morning and remain there all day, and the after punishment grew a mere
thing to laugh at.  the curate might set as many chapters as he pleased
for catherine to get by heart, and joseph might thrash heathcliff till
his arm ached; they forgot everything t
 
 ___________________________
 
ap
of warm hair, and each begin to cry because both, after struggling to
get it, refused to take it. we laughed outright at the petted things; we
did despise them! when would you catch me wishing to have what catherine
wanted? or find us by ourselves, seeking entertainment in yelling, and
sobbing, and rolling on the ground, divided by the whole room? i'd not
exchange, for a thousand lives, my condition here, for edgar linton's at
thrushcross grange--not if i might have the privilege of flinging joseph
off the highest gable, and painting the house-front with hindley's
blood!'

'hush, hush!' i interrupted.  'still you have not told me, heathcliff,
how catherine is left behind?'

'i told you we laughed,' he answered. 'the lintons heard us, and with
one accord they shot like arrows to the door; there was silence, and
then a cry, "oh, mamma, mamma! oh, papa! oh, mamma, come here. oh, papa,
oh!" they really did howl out something in that way. we made frightful
noises to terrify them still more, an
 
 ___________________________
 
l be dirty.'

with that he dashed headforemost out of the room, amid the merriment of
the master and mistress, and to the serious disturbance of catherine; who
could not comprehend how her remarks should have produced such an
exhibition of bad temper.

after playing lady's-maid to the new-comer, and putting my cakes in the
oven, and making the house and kitchen cheerful with great fires,
befitting christmas-eve, i prepared to sit down and amuse myself by
singing carols, all alone; regardless of joseph's affirmations that he
considered the merry tunes i chose as next door to songs.  he had retired
to private prayer in his chamber, and mr. and mrs. earnshaw were engaging
missy's attention by sundry gay trifles bought for her to present to the
little lintons, as an acknowledgment of their kindness.  they had invited
them to spend the morrow at wuthering heights, and the invitation had
been accepted, on one condition: mrs. linton begged that her darlings
might be kept carefully apart from that '
 
 ___________________________
 
nd that naturally led me to
consider the poor lad's situation now, and from singing i changed my mind
to crying.  it struck me soon, however, there would be more sense in
endeavouring to repair some of his wrongs than shedding tears over them:
i got up and walked into the court to seek him.  he was not far; i found
him smoothing the glossy coat of the new pony in the stable, and feeding
the other beasts, according to custom.

'make haste, heathcliff!' i said, 'the kitchen is so comfortable; and
joseph is up-stairs: make haste, and let me dress you smart before miss
cathy comes out, and then you can sit together, with the whole hearth to
yourselves, and have a long chatter till bedtime.'

he proceeded with his task, and never turned his head towards me.

'come--are you coming?' i continued.  'there's a little cake for each of
you, nearly enough; and you'll need half-an-hour's donning.'

i waited five minutes, but getting no answer left him.  catherine supped
with her brother and sister-in-law
 
 ___________________________
 
: joseph and i joined at an unsociable
meal, seasoned with reproofs on one side and sauciness on the other.  his
cake and cheese remained on the table all night for the fairies.  he
managed to continue work till nine o'clock, and then marched dumb and
dour to his chamber.  cathy sat up late, having a world of things to
order for the reception of her new friends: she came into the kitchen
once to speak to her old one; but he was gone, and she only stayed to ask
what was the matter with him, and then went
 
 ___________________________
 
ought them
into the house and set them before the fire, which quickly put colour
into their white faces.

i urged my companion to hasten now and show his amiable humour, and he
willingly obeyed; but ill luck would have it that, as he opened the door
leading from the kitchen on one side, hindley opened it on the other.
they met, and the master, irritated at seeing him clean and cheerful, or,
perhaps, eager to keep his promise to mrs. linton, shoved him back with a
sudden thrust, and angrily bade joseph 'keep the fellow out of the
room--send him into the garret till dinner is over.  he'll be cramming
his fingers in the tarts and stealing the fruit, if left alone with them
a minute.'

'nay, sir,' i could not avoid answering, 'he'll touch nothing, not he:
and i suppose he must have his share of the dainties as well as we.'

'he shall have his share of my hand, if i catch him downstairs till
dark,' cried hindley.  'begone, you vagabond!  what! you are attempting
the coxcomb, are you?  wait till i
 
 ___________________________
 
out
his neck, her face changed, and she was dead.

as the girl had anticipated, the child hareton fell wholly into my hands.
mr. earnshaw, provided he saw him healthy and never heard him cry, was
contented, as far as regarded him.  for himself, he grew desperate: his
sorrow was of that kind that will not lament.  he neither wept nor
prayed; he cursed and defied: execrated god and man, and gave himself up
to reckless dissipation.  the servants could not bear his tyrannical and
evil conduct long: joseph and i were the only two that would stay.  i had
not the heart to leave my charge; and besides, you know, i had been his
foster-sister, and excused his behaviour more readily than a stranger
would.  joseph remained to hector over tenants and labourers; and because
it was his vocation to be where he had plenty of wickedness to reprove.

the master's bad ways and bad companions formed a pretty example for
catherine and heathcliff.  his treatment of the latter was enough to make
a fiend of a saint.
 
 ___________________________
 
ve him.

'cathy, are you busy this afternoon?' asked heathcliff.  'are you going
anywhere?'

'no, it is raining,' she answered.

'why have you that silk frock on, then?' he said.  'nobody coming here, i
hope?'

'not that i know of,' stammered miss: 'but you should be in the field
now, heathcliff.  it is an hour past dinnertime: i thought you were
gone.'

'hindley does not often free us from his accursed presence,' observed the
boy.  'i'll not work any more to-day: i'll stay with you.'

'oh, but joseph will tell,' she suggested; 'you'd better go!'

'joseph is loading lime on the further side of penistone crags; it will
take him till dark, and he'll never know.'

so, saying, he lounged to the fire, and sat down.  catherine reflected an
instant, with knitted brows--she found it needful to smooth the way for
an intrusion.  'isabella and edgar linton talked of calling this
afternoon,' she said, at the conclusion of a minute's silence.  'as it
rains, i hardly expect them; but they may come, and if
 
 ___________________________
 
'

ere this speech ended i became sensible of heathcliff's presence.  having
noticed a slight movement, i turned my head, and saw him rise from the
bench, and steal out noiselessly.  he had listened till he heard
catherine say it would degrade her to marry him, and then he stayed to
hear no further.  my companion, sitting on the ground, was prevented by
the back of the settle from remarking his presence or departure; but i
started, and bade her hush!

'why?' she asked, gazing nervously round.

'joseph is here,' i answered, catching opportunely the roll of his
cartwheels up the road; 'and heathcliff will come in with him.  i'm not
sure whether he were not at the door this moment.'

'oh, he couldn't overhear me at the door!' said she.  'give me hareton,
while you get the supper, and when it is ready ask me to sup with you.  i
want to cheat my uncomfortable conscience, and be convinced that
heathcliff has no notion of these things.  he has not, has he?  he does
not know what being in love is!'

 
 ___________________________
 
her face in the folds of my gown; but i jerked it
forcibly away.  i was out of patience with her folly!

'if i can make any sense of your nonsense, miss,' i said, 'it only goes
to convince me that you are ignorant of the duties you undertake in
marrying; or else that you are a wicked, unprincipled girl.  but trouble
me with no more secrets: i'll not promise to keep them.'

'you'll keep that?' she asked, eagerly.

'no, i'll not promise,' i repeated.

she was about to insist, when the entrance of joseph finished our
conversation; and catherine removed her seat to a corner, and nursed
hareton, while i made the supper.  after it was cooked, my fellow-servant
and i began to quarrel who should carry some to mr. hindley; and we
didn't settle it till all was nearly cold.  then we came to the agreement
that we would let him ask, if he wanted any; for we feared particularly
to go into his presence when he had been some time alone.

'and how isn't that nowt comed in fro' th' field, be this time?  what 
 
 ___________________________
 
barn, i've no doubt.'

i went and called, but got no answer.  on returning, i whispered to
catherine that he had heard a good part of what she said, i was sure; and
told how i saw him quit the kitchen just as she complained of her
brother's conduct regarding him.  she jumped up in a fine fright, flung
hareton on to the settle, and ran to seek for her friend herself; not
taking leisure to consider why she was so flurried, or how her talk would
have affected him.  she was absent such a while that joseph proposed we
should wait no longer.  he cunningly conjectured they were staying away
in order to avoid hearing his protracted blessing.  they were 'ill eneugh
for ony fahl manners,' he affirmed.  and on their behalf he added that
night a special prayer to the usual quarter-of-an-hour's supplication
before meat, and would have tacked another to the end of the grace, had
not his young mistress broken in upon him with a hurried command that he
must run down the road, and, wherever heathcliff had ra
 
 ___________________________
 
mbled, find and
make him re-enter directly!

'i want to speak to him, and i _must_, before i go upstairs,' she said.
'and the gate is open: he is somewhere out of hearing; for he would not
reply, though i shouted at the top of the fold as loud as i could.'

joseph objected at first; she was too much in earnest, however, to suffer
contradiction; and at last he placed his hat on his head, and walked
grumbling forth.  meantime, catherine paced up and down the floor,
exclaiming--'i wonder where he is--i wonder where he can be!  what did i
say, nelly?  i've forgotten.  was he vexed at my bad humour this
afternoon?  dear! tell me what i've said to grieve him?  i do wish he'd
come.  i do wish he would!'

'what a noise for nothing!' i cried, though rather uneasy
 
 ___________________________
 
 myself.  'what
a trifle scares you!  it's surely no great cause of alarm that heathcliff
should take a moonlight saunter on the moors, or even lie too sulky to
speak to us in the hay-loft.  i'll engage he's lurking there.  see if i
don't ferret him out!'

i departed to renew my search; its result was disappointment, and
joseph's quest ended in the same.

'yon lad gets war und war!' observed he on re-entering.  'he's left th'
gate at t' full swing, and miss's pony has trodden dahn two rigs o' corn,
and plottered through, raight o'er into t' meadow!  hahsomdiver, t'
maister 'ull play t' devil to-morn, and he'll do weel.  he's patience
itsseln wi' sich careless, offald craters--patience itsseln he is!  bud
he'll not be soa allus--yah's see, all on ye!  yah mun'n't drive him out
of his heead for nowt!'

'have you found h
 
 ___________________________
 
utright.  she beat hareton, or any child, at a good passionate fit of
crying.

about midnight, while we still sat up, the storm came rattling over the
heights in full fury.  there was a violent wind, as well as thunder, and
either one or the other split a tree off at the corner of the building: a
huge bough fell across the roof, and knocked down a portion of the east
chimney-stack, sending a clatter of stones and soot into the
kitchen-fire.  we thought a bolt had fallen in the middle of us; and
joseph swung on to his knees, beseeching the lord to remember the
patriarchs noah and lot, and, as in former times, spare the righteous,
though he smote the ungodly.  i felt some sentiment that it must be a
judgment on us also.  the jonah, in my mind, was mr. earnshaw; and i
shook the handle of his den that i might ascertain if he were yet living.
he replied audibly enough, in a fashion which made my companion
vociferate, more clamorously than before, that a wide distinction might
be drawn between sai
 
 ___________________________
 

'well, miss!' i exclaimed, touching her shoulder; 'you are not bent on
getting your death, are you?  do you know what o'clock it is?  half-past
twelve.  come, come to bed! there's no use waiting any longer on that
foolish boy: he'll be gone to gimmerton, and he'll stay there now.  he
guesses we shouldn't wait for him till this late hour: at least, he
guesses that only mr. hindley would be up; and he'd rather avoid having
the door opened by the master.'

'nay, nay, he's noan at gimmerton,' said joseph.  'i's niver wonder but
he's at t' bothom of a bog-hoile.  this visitation worn't for nowt, and i
wod hev' ye to look out, miss--yah muh be t' next.  thank hivin for all!
all warks togither for gooid to them as is chozzen, and piked out fro'
th' rubbidge!  yah knaw whet t' scripture ses.'  and he began quoting
several texts, referring us to chapters and verses where we might find
them.

i, having vainly begged the wilful girl to rise and remove her wet
things, left him preaching and her shiveri
 
 ___________________________
 
ng, and betook myself to bed
with little hareton, who slept as fast as if everyone had been sleeping
round him.  i heard joseph read on a while afterwards; then i
distinguished his slow step on the ladder, and then i dropped asleep.

coming down somewhat later than usual, i saw, by the sunbeams piercing
the chinks of the shutters, miss catherine still seated near the
fireplace.  the house-door was ajar, too; light entered from its unclosed
windows; hindley had come out, and stood on the kitchen hearth, haggard
and drowsy.

'what ails you, cathy?' he was saying when i entered: 'you look as dismal
as a drowned whelp.  why
 
 ___________________________
 
nd cool; i threw
back the lattice, and presently the room filled with sweet scents from
the garden; but catherine called peevishly to me, 'ellen, shut the
window.  i'm starving!'  and her teeth chattered as she shrank closer to
the almost extinguished embers.

'she's ill,' said hindley, taking her wrist; 'i suppose that's the reason
she would not go to bed.  damn it!  i don't want to be troubled with more
sickness here.  what took you into the rain?'

'running after t' lads, as usuald!' croaked joseph, catching an
opportunity from our hesitation to thrust in his evil tongue.  'if i war
yah, maister, i'd just slam t' boards i' their faces all on 'em, gentle
and simple!  never a day ut yah're off, but yon cat o' linton comes
sneaking hither; and miss nelly, shoo's a fine lass! shoo sits watching
for ye i' t' kitchen; and as yah're in at one door, he's out at t'other;
and, then, wer grand lady goes a-courting of her side!  it's bonny
behaviour, lurking amang t' fields, after twelve o' t' night,
 
 ___________________________
 
u do turn him out of doors, i'll go with him.  but,
perhaps, you'll never have an opportunity: perhaps, he's gone.'  here she
burst into uncontrollable grief, and the remainder of her words were
inarticulate.

hindley lavished on her a torrent of scornful abuse, and bade her get to
her room immediately, or she shouldn't cry for nothing!  i obliged her to
obey; and i shall never forget what a scene she acted when we reached her
chamber: it terrified me.  i thought she was going mad, and i begged
joseph to run for the doctor.  it proved the commencement of delirium:
mr. kenneth, as soon as he saw her, pronounced her dangerously ill; she
had a fever.  he bled her, and he told me to let her live on whey and
water-gruel, and take care she did not throw herself downstairs or out of
the window; and then he left: for he had enough to do in the parish,
where two or three miles was the ordinary distance between cottage and
cottage.

though i cannot say i made a gentle nurse, and joseph and the master 
 
 ___________________________
 
fever, and died within a few days of each
other.

our young lady returned to us saucier and more passionate, and haughtier
than ever.  heathcliff had never been heard of since the evening of the
thunder-storm; and, one day, i had the misfortune, when she had provoked
me exceedingly, to lay the blame of his disappearance on her: where
indeed it belonged, as she well knew.  from that period, for several
months, she ceased to hold any communication with me, save in the
relation of a mere servant.  joseph fell under a ban also: he would speak
his mind, and lecture her all the same as if she were a little girl; and
she esteemed herself a woman, and our mistress, and thought that her
recent illness gave her a claim to be treated with consideration.  then
the doctor had said that she would not bear crossing much; she ought to
have her own way; and it was nothing less than murder in her eyes for any
one to presume to stand up and contradict her.  from mr. earnshaw and his
companions she kept aloof; 
 
 ___________________________
 
customed to him,
and he may as well like him: considering how heathcliff has reason to
object to him, i'm sure he behaved excellently!'

'what do you think of his going to wuthering heights?' i inquired.  'he
is reformed in every respect, apparently: quite a christian: offering the
right hand of fellowship to his enemies all around!'

'he explained it,' she replied.  'i wonder as much as you.  he said he
called to gather information concerning me from you, supposing you
resided there still; and joseph told hindley, who came out and fell to
questioning him of what he had been doing, and how he had been living;
and finally, desired him to walk in.  there were some persons sitting at
cards; heathcliff joined them; my brother lost some money to him, and,
finding him plentifully supplied, he requested that he would come again
in the evening: to which he consented.  hindley is too reckless to select
his acquaintance prudently: he doesn't trouble himself to reflect on the
causes he might have for m
 
 ___________________________
 
 is better acquainted with his heart than i, or any one besides;
and she never would represent him as worse than he is.  honest people
don't hide their deeds.  how has he been living? how has he got rich? why
is he staying at wuthering heights, the house of a man whom he abhors?
they say mr. earnshaw is worse and worse since he came.  they sit up all
night together continually, and hindley has been borrowing money on his
land, and does nothing but play and drink: i heard only a week ago--it
was joseph who told me--i met him at gimmerton: "nelly," he said, "we's
hae a crowner's 'quest enow, at ahr folks'.  one on 'em 's a'most getten
his finger cut off wi' hauding t' other fro' stickin' hisseln loike a
cawlf.  that's maister, yeah knaw, 'at 's soa up o' going tuh t' grand
'sizes.  he's noan feared o' t' bench o' judges, norther paul, nur peter,
nur john, nur matthew, nor noan on 'em, not he!  he fair likes--he langs
to set his brazened face agean 'em!  and yon bonny lad heathcliff, yah
mind, 
 
 ___________________________
 
: dice,
brandy, cloised shutters, und can'le-light till next day at noon: then,
t'fooil gangs banning und raving to his cham'er, makking dacent fowks dig
thur fingers i' thur lugs fur varry shame; un' the knave, why he can
caint his brass, un' ate, un' sleep, un' off to his neighbour's to gossip
wi' t' wife.  i' course, he tells dame catherine how her fathur's goold
runs into his pocket, and her fathur's son gallops down t' broad road,
while he flees afore to oppen t' pikes!"  now, miss linton, joseph is an
old rascal, but no liar; and, if his account of heathcliff's conduct be
true, you would never think of desiring such a husband, would you?'

'you are leagued with the rest, ellen!' she replied.  'i'll not listen to
your slanders.  what malevolence you must have to wish to convince me
that there is no happiness in the world!'

whether she would have got over this fancy if left to herself, or
persevered in nursing it perpetually, i cannot say: she had little time
to reflect.  the day after,
 
 ___________________________
 
ound her
delirious strength much surpassed mine (she was delirious, i became
convinced by her subsequent actions and ravings).  there was no moon, and
everything beneath lay in misty darkness: not a light gleamed from any
house, far or near all had been extinguished long ago: and those at
wuthering heights were never visible--still she asserted she caught their
shining.

'look!' she cried eagerly, 'that's my room with the candle in it, and the
trees swaying before it; and the other candle is in joseph's garret.
joseph sits up late, doesn't he?  he's waiting till i come home that he
may lock the gate.  well, he'll wait a while yet.  it's a rough journey,
and a sad heart to travel it; and we must pass by gimmerton kirk to go
that journey!  we've braved its ghosts often together, and dared each
other to stand among the graves and ask them to come.  but, heathcliff,
if i dare you now, will you venture?  if you do, i'll keep you.  i'll not
lie there by myself: they may bury me twelve feet deep, a
 
 ___________________________
 
s, except at the moment when i miss them.  i should laugh and
dance for joy, if i found their absence was the total of my miseries, and
the rest was an unnatural dream!

the sun set behind the grange as we turned on to the moors; by that, i
judged it to be six o'clock; and my companion halted half an hour, to
inspect the park, and the gardens, and, probably, the place itself, as
well as he could; so it was dark when we dismounted in the paved yard of
the farm-house, and your old fellow-servant, joseph, issued out to
receive us by the light of a dip candle.  he did it with a courtesy that
redounded to his credit.  his first act was to elevate his torch to a
level with my face, squint malignantly, project his under-lip, and turn
away.  then he took the two horses, and led them into the stables;
reappearing for the purpose of locking the outer gate, as if we lived in
an ancient castle.

heathcliff stayed to speak to him, and i entered the kitchen--a dingy,
untidy hole; i daresay you would not k
 
 ___________________________
 
 not comprehend.

'shall you and i be friends, hareton?' was my next essay at conversation.

an oath, and a threat to set throttler on me if i did not 'frame off'
rewarded my perseverance.

'hey, throttler, lad!' whispered the little wretch, rousing a half-bred
bull-dog from its lair in a corner.  'now, wilt thou be ganging?' he
asked authoritatively.

love for my life urged a compliance; i stepped over the threshold to wait
till the others should enter.  mr. heathcliff was nowhere visible; and
joseph, whom i followed to the stables, and requested to accompany me in,
after staring and muttering to himself, screwed up his nose and
replied--'mim! mim! mim!  did iver christian body hear aught like it?
mincing un' munching!  how can i tell whet ye say?'

'i say, i wish you to come with me into the house!' i cried, thinking him
deaf, yet highly disgusted at his rudeness.

'none o' me!  i getten summut else to do,' he answered, and continued his
work; moving his lantern jaws meanwhile, and surveyi
 
 ___________________________
 
as not
aware how openly i grieved, till earnshaw halted opposite, in his
measured walk, and gave me a stare of newly-awakened surprise.  taking
advantage of his recovered attention, i exclaimed--'i'm tired with my
journey, and i want to go to bed!  where is the maid-servant?  direct me
to her, as she won't come to me!'

'we have none,' he answered; 'you must wait on yourself!'

'where must i sleep, then?' i sobbed; i was beyond regarding
self-respect, weighed down by fatigue and wretchedness.

'joseph will show you heathcliff's chamber,' said he; 'open that
door--he's in there.'

i was going to obey, but he suddenly arrested me, and added in the
strangest tone--'be so good as to turn your lock, and draw your
bolt--don't omit it!'

'well!' i said.  'but why, mr. earnshaw?'  i did not relish the notion of
deliberately fastening myself in with heathcliff.

'look here!' he replied, pulling from his waistcoat a
curiously-constructed pistol, having a double-edged spring knife attached
to the barre
 
 ___________________________
 
ill_ have it back; and i'll have _his_ gold too; and then
his blood; and hell shall have his soul!  it will be ten times blacker
with that guest than ever it was before!'

you've acquainted me, ellen, with your old master's habits.  he is
clearly on the verge of madness: he was so last night at least.  i
shuddered to be near him, and thought on the servant's ill-bred
moroseness as comparatively agreeable.  he now recommenced his moody
walk, and i raised the latch, and escaped into the kitchen.  joseph was
bending over the fire, peering into a large pan that swung above it; and
a wooden bowl of oatmeal stood on the settle close by.  the contents of
the pan began to boil, and he turned to plunge his hand into the bowl; i
conjectured that this preparation was probably for our supper, and, being
hungry, i resolved it should be eatable; so, crying out sharply, '_i'll_
make the porridge!'  i removed the vessel out of his reach, and proceeded
to take off my hat and riding-habit.  'mr. earnshaw,' i 
 
 ___________________________
 
me to be flitting.  i niver
_did_ think to see t' day that i mud lave th' owld place--but i doubt
it's nigh at hand!'

this lamentation drew no notice from me: i went briskly to work, sighing
to remember a period when it would have been all merry fun; but compelled
speedily to drive off the remembrance.  it racked me to recall past
happiness and the greater peril there was of conjuring up its apparition,
the quicker the thible ran round, and the faster the handfuls of meal
fell into the water.  joseph beheld my style of cookery with growing
indignation.

'thear!' he ejaculated.  'hareton, thou willn't sup thy porridge
to-neeght; they'll be naught but lumps as big as my neive.  thear, agean!
i'd fling in bowl un' all, if i wer ye!  there, pale t' guilp off, un'
then ye'll hae done wi' 't.  bang, bang.  it's a mercy t' bothom isn't
deaved out!'

it _was_ rather a rough mess, i own, when poured into the basins; four
had been provided, and a gallon pitcher of new milk was brought from the
dairy,
 
 ___________________________
 
ng a large, low, curtainless bed,
with an indigo-coloured quilt, at one end.

'what do i want with yours?' i retorted.  'i suppose mr. heathcliff does
not lodge at the top of the house, does he?'

'oh! it's maister _hathecliff's_ ye're wanting?' cried he, as if making a
new discovery.  'couldn't ye ha' said soa, at onst? un' then, i mud ha'
telled ye, baht all this wark, that that's just one ye cannut see--he
allas keeps it locked, un' nob'dy iver mells on't but hisseln.'

'you've a nice house, joseph,' i could not refrain from observing, 'and
pleasant inmates; and i think the concentrated essence of all the madness
in the world took up its abode in my brain the day i linked my fate with
theirs!  however, that is not to the present purpose--there are other
rooms.  for heaven's sake be quick, and let me settle somewhere!'

he made no reply to this adjuration; only plodding doggedly down the
wooden steps, and halting, before an apartment which, from that halt and
the superior quality of its fu
 
 ___________________________
 
isted on being provided instantly with a place of
refuge, and means of repose.

'whear the divil?' began the religious elder.  'the lord bless us!  the
lord forgie us!  whear the _hell_ wold ye gang? ye marred, wearisome
nowt!  ye've seen all but hareton's bit of a cham'er.  there's not
another hoile to lig down in i' th' hahse!'

i was so vexed, i flung my tray and its contents on the ground; and then
seated myself at the stairs'-head, hid my face in my hands, and cried.

'ech! ech!' exclaimed joseph.  'weel done, miss cathy! weel done, miss
cathy!  howsiver, t' maister sall just tum'le o'er them brooken pots; un'
then we's hear summut; we's hear how it's to be.  gooid-for-naught
madling! ye desarve pining fro' this to chrustmas, flinging t' precious
gifts o'god under fooit i' yer flaysome rages!  but i'm mista'en if ye
shew yer sperrit lang.  will hathecliff bide sich bonny ways, think ye? i
nobbut wish he may catch ye i' that plisky.  i nobbut wish he may.'

and so he went on scolding to 
 
 ___________________________
 
,
collecting the shattered earthenware, and drying the spatters of milk
from the banister with my pocket-handkerchief. our labours were scarcely
over when i heard earnshaw's tread in the passage; my assistant tucked
in his tail, and pressed to the wall; i stole into the nearest doorway.
the dog's endeavour to avoid him was unsuccessful; as i guessed by a
scutter down-stairs, and a prolonged, piteous yelping. i had better
luck: he passed on, entered his chamber, and shut the door. directly
after joseph came up with hareton, to put him to bed. i had found
shelter in hareton's room, and the old man, on seeing me, said,--'they's
rahm for boath ye un' yer pride, now, i sud think i' the hahse. it's
empty; ye may hev' it all to yerseln, un' him as allus maks a third, i'
sich ill company!'

gladly did i take advantage of this intimation; and the minute i flung
myself into a chair, by the fire, i nodded, and slept.  my slumber was
deep and sweet, though over far too soon.  mr. heathcliff awoke me; he
 
 ___________________________
 
 curiously
confounded with his own black father!  after concluding these precious
orisons--and they lasted generally till he grew hoarse and his voice was
strangled in his throat--he would be off again; always straight down to
the grange!  i wonder edgar did not send for a constable, and give him
into custody!  for me, grieved as i was about catherine, it was
impossible to avoid regarding this season of deliverance from degrading
oppression as a holiday.

'i recovered spirits sufficient to bear joseph's eternal lectures without
weeping, and to move up and down the house less with the foot of a
frightened thief than formerly.  you wouldn't think that i should cry at
anything joseph could say; but he and hareton are detestable companions.
i'd rather sit with hindley, and hear his awful talk, than with "t'
little maister" and his staunch supporter, that odious old man!  when
heathcliff is in, i'm often obliged to seek the kitchen and their
society, or starve among the damp uninhabited chambers;
 
 ___________________________
 
 when he is not,
as was the case this week, i establish a table and chair at one corner of
the house fire, and never mind how mr. earnshaw may occupy himself; and
he does not interfere with my arrangements.  he is quieter now than he
used to be, if no one provokes him: more sullen and depressed, and less
furious.  joseph affirms he's sure he's an altered man: that the lord has
touched his heart, and he is saved "so as by fire."  i'm puzzled to
detect signs of the favourable change: but it is not my business.

'yester-evening i sat in my nook reading some old books till late on
towards twelve.  it seemed so dismal to go up-stairs, with the wild snow
blowing outside, and my thoughts continually reverting to the kirk-yard
and the new-made grave!  i dared hardly lift my eyes from the page before
me, that melancholy
 
 ___________________________
 
 scene so instantly usurped its place.  hindley sat
opposite, his head leant on his hand; perhaps meditating on the same
subject.  he had ceased drinking at a point below irrationality, and had
neither stirred nor spoken during two or three hours.  there was no sound
through the house but the moaning wind, which shook the windows every now
and then, the faint crackling of the coals, and the click of my snuffers
as i removed at intervals the long wick of the candle.  hareton and
joseph were probably fast asleep in bed.  it was very, very sad: and
while i read i sighed, for it seemed as if all joy had vanished from the
world, never to be restored.

'the doleful silence was broken at length by the sound of the kitchen
latch: heathcliff had returned from his watch earlier than usual; owing,
i suppose, to the sudden storm.  that entrance was fastened, and we heard
him coming round to get in by the other.  i rose with an irrepressible
expression of what i felt on my lips, which in
 
 ___________________________
 
ht abode!  as i sat nursing these
reflections, the casement behind me was banged on to the floor by a blow
from the latter individual, and his black countenance looked blightingly
through.  the stanchions stood too close to suffer his shoulders to
follow, and i smiled, exulting in my fancied security.  his hair and
clothes were whitened with snow, and his sharp cannibal teeth, revealed
by cold and wrath, gleamed through the dark.

'"isabella, let me in, or i'll make you repent!" he "girned," as joseph
calls it.

'"i cannot commit murder," i replied.  "mr. hindley stands sentinel with
a knife and loaded pistol."

'"let me in by the kitchen door," he said.

'"hindley will be there before me," i answered: "and that's a poor love
of yours that cannot bear a shower of snow!  we were left at peace in our
beds as long as the summer moon shone, but the moment a blast of winter
returns, you must run for shelter!  heathcliff, if i were you, i'd go
stretch myself over her grave and die like a faithful 
 
 ___________________________
 
o its
owner's wrist.  heathcliff pulled it away by main force, slitting up the
flesh as it passed on, and thrust it dripping into his pocket.  he then
took a stone, struck down the division between two windows, and sprang
in.  his adversary had fallen senseless with excessive pain and the flow
of blood, that gushed from an artery or a large vein.  the ruffian kicked
and trampled on him, and dashed his head repeatedly against the flags,
holding me with one hand, meantime, to prevent me summoning joseph.  he
exerted preterhuman self-denial in abstaining from finishing him
completely; but getting out of breath, he finally desisted, and dragged
the apparently inanimate body on to the settle.  there he tore off the
sleeve of earnshaw's coat, and bound up the wound with brutal roughness;
spitting and cursing during the operation as energetically as he had
kicked before.  being at liberty, i lost no time in seeking the old
servant; who, having gathered by degrees the purport of my hasty tale,
hurri
 
 ___________________________
 
 the steps two at once.

'"what is ther to do, now? what is ther to do, now?"

'"there's this to do," thundered heathcliff, "that your master's mad; and
should he last another month, i'll have him to an asylum.  and how the
devil did you come to fasten me out, you toothless hound?  don't stand
muttering and mumbling there.  come, i'm not going to nurse him.  wash
that stuff away; and mind the sparks of your candle--it is more than half
brandy!"

'"and so ye've been murthering on him?" exclaimed joseph, lifting his
hands and eyes in horror.  "if iver i seed a seeght loike this!  may the
lord--"

'heathcliff gave him a push on to his knees in the middle of the blood,
and flung a towel to him; but instead of proceeding to dry it up, he
joined his hands and began a prayer, which excited my laughter from its
odd phraseology.  i was in the condition of mind to be shocked at
nothing: in fact, i was as reckless as some malefactors show themselves
at the foot of the gallows.

'"oh, i forgot you," sai
 
 ___________________________
 
d the tyrant.  "you shall do that.  down with
you.  and you conspire with him against me, do you, viper?  there, that
is work fit for you!"

'he shook me till my teeth rattled, and pitched me beside joseph, who
steadily concluded his supplications, and then rose, vowing he would set
off for the grange directly.  mr. linton was a magistrate, and though he
had fifty wives dead, he should inquire into this.  he was so obstinate
in his resolution, that heathcliff deemed it expedient to compel from my
lips a recapitulation of what had taken place; standing over me, heaving
with malevolence, as i reluctantly delivered the account in answer to his
questions.  it required a great deal of labour to satisf
 
 ___________________________
 
y the old man
that heathcliff was not the aggressor; especially with my hardly-wrung
replies.  however, mr. earnshaw soon convinced him that he was alive
still; joseph hastened to administer a dose of spirits, and by their
succour his master presently regained motion and consciousness.
heathcliff, aware that his opponent was ignorant of the treatment
received while insensible, called him deliriously intoxicated; and said
he should not notice his atrocious conduct further, but advised him to
get to bed.  to my joy, he left us, after giving this judicious counsel,
and hindley stretched himself on the hearthstone.  i departed to my own
room, marvelling that i ha
 
 ___________________________
 
 between me and
him; so instead of endeavouring to reach me, he snatched a dinner-knife
from the table and flung it at my head.  it struck beneath my ear, and
stopped the sentence i was uttering; but, pulling it out, i sprang to the
door and delivered another; which i hope went a little deeper than his
missile.  the last glimpse i caught of him was a furious rush on his
part, checked by the embrace of his host; and both fell locked together
on the hearth.  in my flight through the kitchen i bid joseph speed to
his master; i knocked over hareton, who was hanging a litter of puppies
from a chair-back in the doorway; and, blessed as a soul escaped from
purgatory, i bounded, leaped, and flew down the steep road; then,
quitting its windings, shot direct across the moor, rolling over banks,
and wading through marshes: precipitating myself, in fact, towards the
beacon-light of the grange.  and far rather would i be condemned to a
perpetual dwelling in the infernal regions than, even for one night,

 
 ___________________________
 
hook
his head, and advised that heathcliff should be let alone; affirming, if
the truth were known, hareton would be found little else than a beggar.

'his father died in debt,' he said; 'the whole property is mortgaged, and
the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow him an opportunity of
creating some interest in the creditor's heart, that he may be inclined
to deal leniently towards him.'

when i reached the heights, i explained that i had come to see everything
carried on decently; and joseph, who appeared in sufficient distress,
expressed satisfaction at my presence.  mr. heathcliff said he did not
perceive that i was wanted; but i might stay and order the arrangements
for the funeral, if i chose.

'correctly,' he remarked, 'that fool's body should be buried at the
cross-roads, without ceremony of any kind. i happened to leave him ten
minutes yesterday afternoon, and in that interval he fastened the two
doors of the house against me, and he has spent the night in drinking
himself t
 
 ___________________________
 
led
head and bleeding ear.  i opened the wicket and ran to the door, knocking
vehemently for admittance.  a woman whom i knew, and who formerly lived
at gimmerton, answered: she had been servant there since the death of mr.
earnshaw.

'ah,' said she, 'you are come a-seeking your little mistress!  don't be
frightened.  she's here safe: but i'm glad it isn't the master.'

'he is not at home then, is he?' i panted, quite breathless with quick
walking and alarm.

'no, no,' she replied: 'both he and joseph are off, and i think they
won't return this hour or more.  step in and rest you a bit.'

i entered, and beheld my stray lamb seated on the hearth, rocking herself
in a little chair that had been her mother's when a child.  her hat was
hung against the wall, and she seemed perfectly at home, laughing and
chattering, in the best spirits imaginable, to hareton--now a great,
strong lad of eighteen--who stared at her with considerable curiosity and
astonishment: comprehending precious little of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
ted him physically
ill; thanks to his fearless nature, which offered no temptation to that
course of oppression: he had none of the timid susceptibility that would
have given zest to ill-treatment, in heathcliff's judgment.  he appeared
to have bent his malevolence on making him a brute: he was never taught
to read or write; never rebuked for any bad habit which did not annoy his
keeper; never led a single step towards virtue, or guarded by a single
precept against vice.  and from what i heard, joseph contributed much to
his deterioration, by a narrow-minded partiality which prompted him to
flatter and pet him, as a boy, because he was the head of the old family.
and as he had been in the habit of accusing catherine earnshaw and
heathcliff, when children, of putting the master past his patience, and
compelling him to seek solace in drink by what he termed their 'offald
ways,' so at present he laid the whole burden of hareton's faults on the
shoulders of the usurper of his property.  if the l
 
 ___________________________
 
ad swore, he wouldn't
correct him: nor however culpably he behaved.  it gave joseph
satisfaction, apparently, to watch him go the worst lengths: he allowed
that the lad was ruined: that his soul was abandoned to perdition; but
then he reflected that heathcliff must answer for it.  hareton's blood
would be required at his hands; and there lay immense consolation in that
thought.  joseph had instilled into him a pride of name, and of his
lineage; he would, had he dared, have fostered hate between him and the
present owner of the heights: but his dread of that owner amounted to
superstition; and he confined his feelings regarding him to muttered
innuendoes and private comminations.  i don't pretend to be intimately
acquainted with the mode of living customary in those days at wuthering
heights: i only speak from hearsay; for i saw little.  the villagers
affirmed mr. heathcliff w
 
 ___________________________
 
at wuthering heights?  between his father
and hareton, what playmates and instructors they'll be.  our doubts were
presently decided--even earlier than i expected.  i had just taken the
children up-stairs, after tea was finished, and seen linton asleep--he
would not suffer me to leave him till that was the case--i had come down,
and was standing by the table in the hall, lighting a bedroom candle for
mr. edgar, when a maid stepped out of the kitchen and informed me that
mr. heathcliff's servant joseph was at the door, and wished to speak with
the master.

'i shall ask him what he wants first,' i said, in considerable
trepidation.  'a very unlikely hour to be troubling people, and the
instant they have returned from a long journey.  i don't think the master
can see him.'

joseph had advanced through the kitchen as i uttered these words, and now
presented himself in the hall.  he was donned in his sunday garments,
with his most sanctimonious and sourest face, and, holding his hat in one
hand, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and his stick in the other, he proceeded to clean his shoes on the
mat.

'good-evening, joseph,' i said, coldly.  'what business brings you here
to-night?'

'it's maister linton i mun spake to,' he answered, waving me disdainfully
aside.

'mr. linton is going to bed; unless you have something particular to say,
i'm sure he won't hear it now,' i continued.  'you had better sit down in
there, and entrust your message to me.'

'which is his rahm?' pursued the fellow, surveying the range of closed
doors.

i perceived he was bent on refusing my mediation, so very reluctantly i
went up to the 
 
 ___________________________
 
library, and announced the unseasonable visitor, advising
that he should be dismissed till next day.  mr. linton had no time to
empower me to do so, for joseph mounted close at my heels, and, pushing
into the apartment, planted himself at the far side of the table, with
his two fists clapped on the head of his stick, and began in an elevated
tone, as if anticipating opposition--

'hathecliff has sent me for his lad, and i munn't goa back 'bout him.'

edgar linton was silent a minute; an expression of exceeding sorrow
overcast his features: he would have pitied the child on his own account;
but, recalling isabella's hopes and fears, and anxious wishes 
 
 ___________________________
 
very exhibition of any desire to
keep him would have rendered the claimant more peremptory: there was
nothing left but to resign him.  however, he was not going to rouse him
from his sleep.

'tell mr. heathcliff,' he answered calmly, 'that his son shall come to
wuthering heights to-morrow.  he is in bed, and too tired to go the
distance now.  you may also tell him that the mother of linton desired
him to remain under my guardianship; and, at present, his health is very
precarious.'

'noa!' said joseph, giving a thud with his prop on the floor, and
assuming an authoritative air.  'noa! that means naught.  hathecliff maks
noa 'count o' t' mother, nor ye norther; but he'll heu' his lad; und i
mun tak' him--soa now ye knaw!'

'you shall not to-night!' answered linton decisively.  'walk down stairs
at once, and repeat to your master what i have said.  ellen, show him
down.  go--'

and, aiding the indignant elder with a lift by the arm, he rid the room
of him and closed the door.

'varrah weell!' 
 
 ___________________________
 
shouted joseph, as he slowly drew off.  'to-morn, he's
come hisseln, and thrust _him_ out, if ye darr!'




chapter xx


to obviate the danger of this threat being fulfilled, mr. linton
commissioned me to take the boy home early, on catherine's pony; and,
said he--'as we shall now have no influence over his destiny, good or
bad, you must say nothing of where he is gone to my daughter: she cannot
associate with him hereafter, and it is better for her to remain in
ignorance of his proximity; lest she should be 
 
 ___________________________
 
ons in his countenance.  he surveyed the carved front
and low-browed lattices, the straggling gooseberry-bushes and crooked
firs, with solemn intentness, and then shook his head: his private
feelings entirely disapproved of the exterior of his new abode.  but he
had sense to postpone complaining: there might be compensation within.
before he dismounted, i went and opened the door.  it was half-past six;
the family had just finished breakfast: the servant was clearing and
wiping down the table.  joseph stood by his master's chair telling some
tale concerning a lame horse; and hareton was preparing for the hayfield.

'hallo, nelly!' said mr. heathcliff, when he saw me.  'i feared i should
have to come down and fetch my property myself.  you've brought it, have
you?  let us see what we can make of it.'

he got up and strode to the door: hareton and joseph followed in gaping
curiosity.  poor linton ran a frightened eye over the faces of the three.

'sure-ly,' said joseph after a grave inspection
 
 ___________________________
 
again.  i guess you'll report what you
hear and see to the cipher at the grange; and this thing won't be settled
while you linger about it.'

'well,' replied i, 'i hope you'll be kind to the boy, mr. heathcliff, or
you'll not keep him long; and he's all you have akin in the wide world,
that you will ever know--remember.'

'i'll be very kind to him, you needn't fear,' he said, laughing.  'only
nobody else must be kind to him: i'm jealous of monopolising his
affection.  and, to begin my kindness, joseph, bring the lad some
breakfast.  hareton, you infernal calf, begone to your work.  yes, nell,'
he added, when they had departed, 'my son is prospective owner of your
place, and i should not wish him to die till i was certain of being his
successor.  besides, he's _mine_, and i want the triumph of seeing _my_
descendant fairly lord of their estates; my child hiring their children
to till their fathers' lands for wages.  that is the sole consideration
which can make me endure the whelp: i despise 
 
 ___________________________
 
, also, to come three times a week, from
twenty miles' distance, to teach him what he pleases to learn.  i've
ordered hareton to obey him: and in fact i've arranged everything with a
view to preserve the superior and the gentleman in him, above his
associates.  i do regret, however, that he so little deserves the
trouble: if i wished any blessing in the world, it was to find him a
worthy object of pride; and i'm bitterly disappointed with the
whey-faced, whining wretch!'

while he was speaking, joseph returned bearing a basin of milk-porridge,
and placed it before linton: who stirred round the homely mess with a
look of aversion, and affirmed he could not eat it. i saw the old
man-servant shared largely in his master's scorn of the child; though he
was compelled to retain the sentiment in his heart, because heathcliff
plainly meant his underlings to hold him in honour.

'cannot ate it?' repeated he, peering in linton's face, and subduing his
voice to a whisper, for fear of being overheard.  
 
 ___________________________
 
'but maister hareton
nivir ate naught else, when he wer a little 'un; and what wer gooid
enough for him's gooid enough for ye, i's rayther think!'

'i _sha'n't_ eat it!' answered linton, snappishly.  'take it away.'

joseph snatched up the food indignantly, and brought it to us.

'is there aught ails th' victuals?' he asked, thrusting the tray under
heathcliff's nose.

'what should ail them?' he said.

'wah!' answered joseph, 'yon dainty chap says he cannut ate 'em.  but i
guess it's raight!  his mother wer just soa--we wer a'most too mucky to
sow t' corn for makking her breead.'

'don't mention his mother to me,' said the master, angrily.  'get him
something that he can eat, that's all.  what is his usual food, nelly?'

i suggested boiled milk or tea; and the housekeeper received instructions
to prepare some.  come, i reflected, his father's selfishness may
contribute to his comfort.  he perceives his delicate con
 
 ___________________________
 
ssed much talk between them: linton learnt his lessons and
spent his evenings in a small apartment they called the parlour: or else
lay in bed all day: for he was constantly getting coughs, and colds, and
aches, and pains of some sort.

'and i never know such a fainthearted creature,' added the woman; 'nor
one so careful of hisseln. he _will_ go on, if i leave the window open a
bit late in the evening. oh! it's killing, a breath of night air! and he
must have a fire in the middle of summer; and joseph's bacca-pipe is
poison; and he must always have sweets and dainties, and always milk,
milk for ever--heeding naught how the rest of us are pinched in winter;
and there he'll sit, wrapped in his furred cloak in his chair by the
fire, with some toast and water or other slop on the hob to sip at; and
if hareton, for pity, comes to amuse him--hareton is not bad-natured,
though he's rough--they're sure to part, one swearing and the other
crying. i believe the master would relish earnshaw's thrashing
 
 ___________________________
 
r coming.

heathcliff bade me be quiet; and, preceding us up the path, hastened to
open the door.  my young lady gave him several looks, as if she could not
exactly make up her mind what to think of him; but now he smiled when he
met her eye, and softened his voice in addressing her; and i was foolish
enough to imagine the memory of her mother might disarm him from desiring
her injury.  linton stood on the hearth.  he had been out walking in the
fields, for his cap was on, and he was calling to joseph to bring him dry
shoes.  he had grown tall of his age, still wanting some months of
sixteen.  his features were pretty yet, and his eye and complexion
brighter than i remembered them, though with merely temporary lustre
borrowed from the salubrious air and genial sun.

'now, who is that?' asked mr. heathcliff, turning to cathy.  'can you
tell?'

'your son?' she said, having doubtfully surveyed, first one and then the
other.

'yes, yes,' answered he: 'but is this the only time you have beheld hi
 
 ___________________________
 
studying
the familiar landscape with a stranger's and an artist's interest.
catherine took a sly look at him, expressing small admiration.  she then
turned her attention to seeking out objects of amusement for herself, and
tripped merrily on, lilting a tune to supply the lack of conversation.

'i've tied his tongue,' observed heathcliff.  'he'll not venture a single
syllable all the time!  nelly, you recollect me at his age--nay, some
years younger.  did i ever look so stupid: so "gaumless," as joseph calls
it?'

'worse,' i replied, 'because more sullen with it.'

'i've a pleasure in him,' he continued, reflecting aloud. 'he has
satisfied my expectations. if he were a born fool i should not enjoy it
half so much. but he's no fool; and i can sympathise with all his
feelings, having felt them myself. i know what he suffers now, for
instance, exactly: it is merely a beginning of what he shall suffer,
though. and he'll never be able to emerge from his bathos of coarseness
and ignorance. i've got
 
 ___________________________
 
you can walk over yourself.  but i shall not return till this
time next week; and i think your master himself would scarcely object to
her visiting her cousin.'

'come in,' said i, taking cathy by the arm and half forcing her to
re-enter; for she lingered, viewing with troubled eyes the features of
the speaker, too stern to express his inward deceit.

he pushed his horse close, and, bending down, observed--'miss catherine,
i'll own to you that i have little patience with linton; and hareton and
joseph have less.  i'll own that he's with a harsh set.  he pines for
kindness, as well as love; and a kind word from you would be his best
medicine.  don't mind mrs. dean's cruel cautions; but be generous, and
contrive to see him.  he dreams of you day and night, and cannot be
persuaded that you don't hate him, since you neither write nor call.'

i closed the door, and rolled a stone to assist the loosened lock in
holding it; and spreading my umbrella, i drew my charge underneath: for
the rain began 
 
 ___________________________
 
ion of us, how little of the tale was
founded on fact.




chapter xxiii


the rainy night had ushered in a misty morning--half frost, half
drizzle--and temporary brooks crossed our path--gurgling from the
uplands.  my feet were thoroughly wetted; i was cross and low; exactly
the humour suited for making the most of these disagreeable things.  we
entered the farm-house by the kitchen way, to ascertain whether mr.
heathcliff were really absent: because i put slight faith in his own
affirmation.

joseph seemed sitting in a sort of elysium alone, beside a roaring fire;
a quart of ale on the table near him, bristling with large pieces of
toasted oat-cake; and his black, short pipe in his mouth.  catherine ran
to the hearth to warm herself.  i asked if the master was in?  my
question remained so long unanswered, that i thought the old man had
grown deaf, and repeated it louder.

'na--ay!' he snarled, or rather screamed through his nose.  'na--ay! yah
muh goa back whear yah coom frough.'

'joseph!
 
 ___________________________
 
' cried a peevish voice, simultaneously with me, from the inner
room.  'how often am i to call you?  there are only a few red ashes now.
joseph! come this moment.'

vigorous puffs, and a resolute stare into the grate, declared he had no
ear for this appeal.  the housekeeper and hareton were invisible; one
gone on an errand, and the other at his work, probably.  we knew linton's
tones, and entered.

'oh, i hope you'll die in a garret, starved to death!' said the boy,
mistaking our approach for that of his negligent attendant.

he stopped on observing his error: his cousin flew to him.

'is that you, miss linton?' he said, raising his he
 
 ___________________________
 
'are you glad to see me?  can i do you any good?'

'why didn't you come before?' he asked.  'you should have come, instead
of writing.  it tired me dreadfully writing those long letters.  i'd far
rather have talked to you.  now, i can neither bear to talk, nor anything
else.  i wonder where zillah is!  will you' (looking at me) 'step into
the kitchen and see?'

i had received no thanks for my other service; and being unwilling to run
to and fro at his behest, i replied--'nobody is out there but joseph.'

'i want to drink,' he exclaimed fretfully, turning away.  'zillah is
constantly gadding off to gimmerton since papa went: it's miserable!  and
i'm obliged to come down here--they resolved never to hear me up-stairs.'

'is your father attentive to you, master heathcliff?' i asked, perceiving
catherine to be checked in her friendly advances.

'attentive?  he makes them a little more attentive at least,' he cried.
'the wretches!  do you know, miss linton, that brute hareton laughs at
me!  i hat
 
 ___________________________
 
 was sick, and
couldn't come to the grange; and how papa would object to my going: and
then i negotiated with him about the pony.  he is fond of reading, and he
thinks of leaving soon to get married; so he offered, if i would lend him
books out of the library, to do what i wished: but i preferred giving him
my own, and that satisfied him better.

'on my second visit linton seemed in lively spirits; and zillah (that is
their housekeeper) made us a clean room and a good fire, and told us
that, as joseph was out at a prayer-meeting and hareton earnshaw was off
with his dogs--robbing our woods of pheasants, as i heard afterwards--we
might do what we liked.  she brought me some warm wine and gingerbread,
and appeared exceedingly good-natured, and linton sat in the arm-chair,
and i in the little rocking chair on the hearth-stone, and we laughed and
talked so merrily, and found so much to say: we planned where we would
go, and what we would do in summer.  i needn't repeat that, because you
would ca
 
 ___________________________
 
e with
passion; and his face looked swelled and furious.  "take her there if she
comes to see thee: thou shalln't keep me out of this.  begone wi' ye
both!"

'he swore at us, and left linton no time to answer, nearly throwing him
into the kitchen; and he clenched his fist as i followed, seemingly
longing to knock me down.  i was afraid for a moment, and i let one
volume fall; he kicked it after me, and shut us out.  i heard a
malignant, crackly laugh by the fire, and turning, beheld that odious
joseph standing rubbing his bony hands, and quivering.

'"i wer sure he'd sarve ye out!  he's a grand lad!  he's getten t' raight
sperrit in him!  _he_ knaws--ay, he knaws, as weel as i do, who sud be t'
maister yonder--ech, ech, ech!  he made ye skift properly!  ech, ech,
ech!"

'"where must we go?" i asked of my cousin, disregarding the old wretch's
mockery.

'linton was white and trembling.  he was not pretty then, ellen: oh, no!
he looked frightful; for his thin face and large eyes were wrought in
 
 ___________________________
 
to
an expression of frantic, powerless fury.  he grasped the handle of the
door, and shook it: it was fastened inside.

'"if you don't let me in, i'll kill you!--if you don't let me in, i'll
kill you!" he rather shrieked than said.  "devil! devil!--i'll kill
you--i'll kill you!"

joseph uttered his croaking laugh again.

'"thear, that's t' father!" he cried.  "that's father!  we've allas
summut o' either side in us.  niver heed, hareton, lad--dunnut be
'feard--he cannot get at thee!"

'i took hold of linton's hands, and tried to pull him away; but he
shrieked so shockingly that i dared not proceed.  at last his cries were
choked by a dreadful fit of coughing; blood gushed from his mouth, and he
fell on the ground.  i ran into the yard, sick with terror; and called
for zillah, 
 
 ___________________________
 
soon heard me: she was milking the
cows in a shed behind the barn, and hurrying from her work, she inquired
what there was to do?  i hadn't breath to explain; dragging her in, i
looked about for linton.  earnshaw had come out to examine the mischief
he had caused, and he was then conveying the poor thing up-stairs.  zillah
and i ascended after him; but he stopped me at the top of the steps, and
said i shouldn't go in: i must go home.  i exclaimed that he had killed
linton, and i _would_ enter.  joseph locked the door, and declared i
should do "no sich stuff," and asked me whether i were "bahn to be as mad
as him."  i stood crying till the housekeeper reappeared.  she affirmed
he would be better in a bit, but he couldn't do with that shrieking and
din; and she took me, and nearly carried me into the house.

'ellen, i was ready to tear my hair off my head!  i sobbed and wept so
that my eyes were almost blind; and the ruffian you have such sympathy
with stood opposite: presuming every now and t
 
 ___________________________
 
eached the threshold;
catherine walked in, and i stood waiting till she had conducted the
invalid to a chair, expecting her out immediately; when mr. heathcliff,
pushing me forward, exclaimed--'my house is not stricken with the plague,
nelly; and i have a mind to be hospitable to-day: sit down, and allow me
to shut the door.'

he shut and locked it also.  i started.

'you shall have tea before you go home,' he added.  'i am by myself.
hareton is gone with some cattle to the lees, and zillah and joseph are
off on a journey of pleasure; and, though i'm used to being alone, i'd
rather have some interesting company, if i can get it.  miss linton, take
your seat by _him_.  i give you what i have: the present is hardly worth
accepting; but i have nothing else to offer.  it is linton, i mean.  how
she does stare!  it's odd what a savage feeling i have to anything that
seems afraid of me!  had i been born where laws are less strict and
tastes less dainty, i should treat myself to a slow vivisection 
 
 ___________________________
 
e to fetch you home; and i hope you'll be a dutiful
daughter and not encourage my son to further disobedience.  i was
embarrassed how to punish him when i discovered his part in the business:
he's such a cobweb, a pinch would annihilate him; but you'll see by his
look that he has received his due!  i brought him down one evening, the
day before yesterday, and just set him in a chair, and never touched him
afterwards.  i sent hareton out, and we had the room to ourselves.  in
two hours, i called joseph to carry him up again; and since then my
presence is as potent on his nerves as a ghost; and i fancy he sees me
often, though i am not near.  hareton says he wakes and shrieks in the
night by the hour together, and calls you to protect him from me; and,
whether you like your precious mate, or not, you must come: he's your
concern now; i yield all my interest in him to you.'

'why not let catherine continue here,' i pleaded, 'and send master linton
to her?  as you hate them both, you'd not miss 
 
 ___________________________
 
 somewhere at the heights, i was certain!  and when i slept in
her chamber--i was beaten out of that.  i couldn't lie there; for the
moment i closed my eyes, she was either outside the window, or sliding
back the panels, or entering the room, or even resting her darling head
on the same pillow as she did when a child; and i must open my lids to
see.  and so i opened and closed them a hundred times a night--to be
always disappointed!  it racked me!  i've often groaned aloud, till that
old rascal joseph no doubt believed that my conscience was playing the
fiend inside of me.  now, since i've seen her, i'm pacified--a little.  it
was a strange way of killing: not by inches, but by fractions of
hairbreadths, to beguile me with the spectre of a hope through eighteen
years!'

mr. heathcliff paused and wiped his forehead; his hair clung to it, wet
with perspiration; his eyes were fixed on the red embers of the fire, the
brows not contracted, but raised next the temples; diminishing the grim
aspect 
 
 ___________________________
 
.  'when
i wish to speak to you i'll come here.  i want none of your prying at my
house!'

he signed her to precede him; and casting back a look that cut my heart,
she obeyed.  i watched them, from the window, walk down the garden.
heathcliff fixed catherine's arm under his: though she disputed the act
at first evidently; and with rapid strides he hurried her into the alley,
whose trees concealed them.




chapter xxx


i have paid a visit to the heights, but i have not seen her since she
left: joseph held the door in his hand when i called to ask after her,
and wouldn't let me pass.  he said mrs. linton was 'thrang,' and the
master was not in.  zillah has told me something of the way they go on,
otherwise i should hardly know who was dead and who living.  she thinks
catherine haughty, and does not like her, i can guess by her talk.  my
young lady asked some aid of her when she first came; but mr. heathcliff
told her to follow her own business, and let his daughter-in-law look
after herself;
 
 ___________________________
 
inded,
selfish woman.  catherine evinced a child's annoyance at this neglect;
repaid it with contempt, and thus enlisted my informant among her
enemies, as securely as if she had done her some great wrong.  i had a
long talk with zillah about six weeks ago, a little before you came, one
day when we foregathered on the moor; and this is what she told me.

'the first thing mrs. linton did,' she said, 'on her arrival at the
heights, was to run up-stairs, without even wishing good-evening to me
and joseph; she shut herself into linton's room, and remained till
morning.  then, while the master and earnshaw were at breakfast, she
entered the house, and asked all in a quiver if the doctor might be sent
for? her cousin was very ill.

'"we know that!" answered heathcliff; "but his life is not worth a
farthing, and i won't spend a farthing on him."

'"but i cannot tell how to do," she said; "and if nobody will help me,
he'll die!"

'"walk out of the room," cried the master, "and let me never hear a wo
 
 ___________________________
 
ght to
linton's face, looked at him, and touched him; afterwards he turned to
her.

'"now--catherine," he said, "how do you feel?"

'she was dumb.

'"how do you feel, catherine?" he repeated.

'"he's safe, and i'm free," she answered: "i should feel well--but," she
continued, with a bitterness she couldn't conceal, "you have left me so
long to struggle against death alone, that i feel and see only death!  i
feel like death!"

'and she looked like it, too!  i gave her a little wine.  hareton and
joseph, who had been wakened by the ringing and the sound of feet, and
heard our talk from outside, now entered.  joseph was fain, i believe, of
the lad's removal; hareton seemed a thought bothered: though he was more
taken up with staring at catherine than thinking of linton.  but the
master bid him get off to bed again: we didn't want his help.  he
afterwards made joseph remove the body to his chamber, and told me to
return to mine, and mrs. heathcliff remained by herself.

'in the morning, he sent 
 
 ___________________________
 
her.  the first occasion of her coming
down into the house was on a sunday afternoon.  she had cried out, when i
carried up her dinner, that she couldn't bear any longer being in the
cold; and i told her the master was going to thrushcross grange, and
earnshaw and i needn't hinder her from descending; so, as soon as she
heard heathcliff's horse trot off, she made her appearance, donned in
black, and her yellow curls combed back behind her ears as plain as a
quaker: she couldn't comb them out.

'joseph and i generally go to chapel on sundays:' the kirk, you know, has
no minister now, explained mrs. dean; and they call the methodists' or
baptists' place (i can't say which it is) at gimmerton, a chapel.  'joseph
had gone,' she continued, 'but i thought proper to bide at home.  young
folks are always the better for an elder's over-looking; and hareton,
with all his bashfulness, isn't a model of nice behaviour.  i let him
know that his cousin would very likely sit with us, and she had been
always
 
 ___________________________
 
 even a book from which i might tear
a leaf.'

'no books!' i exclaimed.  'how do you contrive to live here without them?
if i may take the liberty to inquire.  though provided with a large
library, i'm frequently very dull at the grange; take my books away, and
i should be desperate!'

'i was always reading, when i had them,' said catherine; 'and mr.
heathcliff never reads; so he took it into his head to destroy my books.
i have not had a glimpse of one for weeks.  only once, i searched through
joseph's store of theology, to his great irritation; and once, hareton, i
came upon a secret stock in your room--some latin and greek, and some
tales and poetry: all old friends.  i brought the last here--and you
gathered them, as a magpie gathers silver spoons, for the mere love of
stealing!  they are of no use to you; or else you concealed them in the
bad spirit that, as you cannot enjoy them, nobody else shall.  perhaps
_your_ envy counselled mr. heathcliff to rob me of my treasures?  but
i've most
 
 ___________________________
 
onsiderably
irritated.  'should you wish it, i'll settle with you now,' and i drew my
note-book from my pocket.

'no, no,' he replied, coolly; 'you'll leave sufficient behind to cover
your debts, if you fail to return: i'm not in such a hurry.  sit down and
take your dinner with us; a guest that is safe from repeating his visit
can generally be made welcome.  catherine! bring the things in: where are
you?'

catherine reappeared, bearing a tray of knives and forks.

'you may get your dinner with joseph,' muttered heathcliff, aside, 'and
remain in the kitchen till he is gone.'

she obeyed his directions very punctually: perhaps she had no temptation
to transgress.  living among clowns and misanthropists, she probably
cannot appreciate a better class of people when she meets them.

with mr. heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on the one hand, and hareton,
absolutely dumb, on the other, i made a somewhat cheerless meal, and bade
adieu early.  i would have departed by the back way, to get a last
glim
 
 ___________________________
 
pse of catherine and annoy old joseph; but hareton received orders to
lead up my horse, and my host himself escorted me to the door, so i could
not fulfil my wish.

'how dreary life gets over in that house!' i reflected, while riding down
the road.  'what a realisation of something more romantic than a fairy
tale it would have been for mrs. linton heathcliff, had she and i struck
up an attachment, as her good nurse desired, and migrated together into
the stirring atmosphere of the town!'




chapter xxxii


1802.--this september i 
 
 ___________________________
 
l you all about it.  stop, you have had nothing to eat, have you?'

'i want nothing: i have ordered supper at home.  you sit down too. i
never dreamt of his dying!  let me hear how it came to pass.  you say you
don't expect them back for some time--the young people?'

'no--i have to scold them every evening for their late rambles: but they
don't care for me.  at least, have a drink of our old ale; it will do you
good: you seem weary.'

she hastened to fetch it before i could refuse, and i heard joseph asking
whether 'it warn't a crying scandal that she should have followers at her
time of life?  and then, to get them jocks out o' t' maister's cellar!  he
fair shaamed to 'bide still and see it.'

she did not stay to retaliate, but re-entered in a minute, bearing a
reaming silver pint, whose contents i lauded with becoming earnestness.
and afterwards she furnished me with the sequel of heathcliff's history.
he had a 'queer' end, as she expressed it.

i was summoned to wuthering heights, within
 
 ___________________________
 
cles,
that had formed her amusement at the grange; and flattered myself we
should get on in tolerable comfort.  the delusion did not last long.
catherine, contented at first, in a brief space grew irritable and
restless. for one thing, she was forbidden to move out of the garden, and
it fretted her sadly to be confined to its narrow bounds as spring drew
on; for another, in following the house, i was forced to quit her
frequently, and she complained of loneliness: she preferred quarrelling
with joseph in the kitchen to sitting at peace in her solitude.  i did
not mind their skirmishes: but hareton was often obliged to seek the
kitchen also, when the master wanted to have the house to himself! and
though in the beginning she either left it at his approach, or quietly
joined in my occupations, and shunned remarking or addressing him--and
though he was always as sullen and silent as possible--after a while, she
changed her behaviour, and became incapable of letting him alone: talking
at him; co
 
 ___________________________
 
proving himself: she had done it effectually.  but her ingenuity was at
work to remedy the injury: while i ironed, or pursued other such
stationary employments as i could not well do in the parlour, she would
bring some pleasant volume and read it aloud to me.  when hareton was
there, she generally paused in an interesting part, and left the book
lying about: that she did repeatedly; but he was as obstinate as a mule,
and, instead of snatching at her bait, in wet weather he took to smoking
with joseph; and they sat like automatons, one on each side of the fire,
the elder happily too deaf to understand her wicked nonsense, as he would
have called it, the younger doing his best to seem to disregard it.  on
fine evenings the latter followed his shooting expeditions, and catherine
yawned and sighed, and teased me to talk to her, and ran off into the
court or garden the moment i began; and, as a last resource, cried, and
said she was tired of living: her life was useless.

mr. heathcliff, who gre
 
 ___________________________
 
became for some days a fixture in the kitchen.
his gun burst while out on the hills by himself; a splinter cut his arm,
and he lost a good deal of blood before he could reach home.  the
consequence was that, perforce, he was condemned to the fireside and
tranquillity, till he made it up again.  it suited catherine to have him
there: at any rate, it made her hate her room up-stairs more than ever:
and she would compel me to find out business below, that she might
accompany me.

on easter monday, joseph went to gimmerton fair with some cattle; and, in
the afternoon, i was busy getting up linen in the kitchen.  earnshaw sat,
morose as usual, at the chimney corner, and my little mistress was
beguiling an idle hour with drawing pictures on the window-panes, varying
her amusement by smothered bursts of songs, and whispered ejaculations,
and quick glances of annoyance and impatience in the direction of her
cousin, who steadfastly smoked, and looked into the grate.  at a notice
that i could do with 
 
 ___________________________
 
not bide it.'

'so you won't be my friend?' she said, smiling as sweet as honey, and
creeping close up.

i overheard no further distinguishable talk, but, on looking round again,
i perceived two such radiant countenances bent over the page of the
accepted book, that i did not doubt the treaty had been ratified on both
sides; and the enemies were, thenceforth, sworn allies.

the work they studied was full of costly pictures; and those and their
position had charm enough to keep them unmoved till joseph came home.  he,
poor man, was perfectly aghast at the spectacle of catherine seated on
the same bench with hareton earnshaw, leaning her hand on his shoulder;
and confounded at his favourite's endurance of her proximity: it affected
him too deeply to allow an observation on the subject that night.  his
emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs he drew, as he solemnly
spread his large bible on the table, and overlaid it with dirty
bank-notes from his pocket-book, the produce of the day's tr
 
 ___________________________
 
seat.

'tak' these in to t' maister, lad,' he said, 'and bide there.  i's gang
up to my own rahm.  this hoile's neither mensful nor seemly for us: we
mun side out and seearch another.'

'come, catherine,' i said, 'we must "side out" too: i've done my ironing.
are you ready to go?'

'it is not eight o'clock!' she answered, rising unwillingly.

'hareton, i'll leave this book upon the chimney-piece, and i'll bring
some more to-morrow.'

'ony books that yah leave, i shall tak' into th' hahse,' said joseph,
'and it'll be mitch if yah find 'em agean; soa, yah may plase yerseln!'

cathy threatened that his library should pay for hers; and, smiling as
she passed hareton, went singing up-stairs: lighter of heart, i venture
to say, than ever she had been under that roof before; except, perhaps,
during her earliest visits to linton.

the intimacy thus commenced grew rapidly; though it encountered temporary
interruptions.  earnshaw was not to be civilized with a wish, and my
young lady was no philosophe
 
 ___________________________
 
my charge beside me, as
heretofore.  she got downstairs before me, and out into the garden, where
she had seen her cousin performing some easy work; and when i went to bid
them come to breakfast, i saw she had persuaded him to clear a large
space of ground from currant and gooseberry bushes, and they were busy
planning together an importation of plants from the grange.

i was terrified at the devastation which had been accomplished in a brief
half-hour; the black-currant trees were the apple of joseph's eye, and
she had just fixed her choice of a flower-bed in the midst of them.

'there!  that will be all shown to the master,' i exclaimed, 'the minute
it is discovered.  and what excuse have you to offer for taking such
liberties with the garden?  we shall have a fine explosion on the head of
it: see if we don't!  mr. hareton, i wonder you should have no more wit
than to go and make that mess at her bidding!'

'i'd forgotten they were joseph's,' answered earnshaw, rather puzzled;
'but i'll te
 
 ___________________________
 
eyes?
down with them! and don't remind me of your existence again.  i thought i
had cured you of laughing.'

'it was me,' muttered hareton.

'what do you say?' demanded the master.

hareton looked at his plate, and did not repeat the confession.  mr.
heathcliff looked at him a bit, and then silently resumed his breakfast
and his interrupted musing.  we had nearly finished, and the two young
people prudently shifted wider asunder, so i anticipated no further
disturbance during that sitting: when joseph appeared at the door,
revealing by his quivering lip and furious eyes that the outrage
committed on his precious shrubs was detected.  he must have seen cathy
and her cousin about the spot before he examined it, for while his jaws
worked like those of a cow chewing its cud, and rendered his speech
difficult to understand, he began:--

'i mun hev' my wage, and i mun goa!  i _hed_ aimed to dee wheare i'd
sarved fur sixty year; and i thowt i'd lug my books up into t' garret,
and all my bits o' stu
 
 ___________________________
 
_ do that!  but nah, shoo's taan my garden fro' me, and by
th' heart, maister, i cannot stand it!  yah may bend to th' yoak an ye
will--i noan used to 't, and an old man doesn't sooin get used to new
barthens.  i'd rayther arn my bite an' my sup wi' a hammer in th' road!'

'now, now, idiot!' interrupted heathcliff, 'cut it short!  what's your
grievance?  i'll interfere in no quarrels between you and nelly.  she may
thrust you into the coal-hole for anything i care.'

'it's noan nelly!' answered joseph.  'i sudn't shift for nelly--nasty ill
nowt as shoo is.  thank god! _shoo_ cannot stale t' sowl o' nob'dy!  shoo
wer niver soa handsome, but what a body mud look at her 'bout winking.
it's yon flaysome, graceless quean, that's witched our lad, wi' her bold
een and her forrard ways--till--nay! it fair brusts my heart!  he's
forgotten all i've done for him, and made on him, and goan and riven up a
whole row o' t' grandest currant-trees i' t' garden!' and here he
lamented outright; unmanned by a s
 
 ___________________________
 
to attain it.  they have yearned towards it so long, and so
unwaveringly, that i'm convinced it will be reached--and soon--because it
has devoured my existence: i am swallowed up in the anticipation of its
fulfilment.  my confessions have not relieved me; but they may account
for some otherwise unaccountable phases of humour which i show.  o god!
it is a long fight; i wish it were over!'

he began to pace the room, muttering terrible things to himself, till i
was inclined to believe, as he said joseph did, that conscience had
turned his heart to an earthly hell.  i wondered greatly how it would
end.  though he seldom before had revealed this state of mind, even by
looks, it was his habitual mood, i had no doubt: he asserted it himself;
but not a soul, from his general bearing, would have conjectured the
fact.  you did not when you saw him, mr. lockwood: and at the period of
which i speak, he was just the same as then; only fonder of continued
solitude, and perhaps still more laconic in compa
 
 ___________________________
 
g i
found he was still away.  we were in april then: the weather was sweet
and warm, the grass as green as showers and sun could make it, and the
two dwarf apple-trees near the southern wall in full bloom.  after
breakfast, catherine insisted on my bringing a chair and sitting with my
work under the fir-trees at the end of the house; and she beguiled
hareton, who had perfectly recovered from his accident, to dig and
arrange her little garden, which was shifted to that corner by the
influence of joseph's complaints.  i was comfortably revelling in the
spring fragrance around, and the beautiful soft blue overhead, when my
young lady, who had run down near the gate to procure some primrose roots
for a border, returned only half laden, and informed us that mr.
heathcliff was coming in.  'and he spoke to me,' she added, with a
perplexed countenance.

'what did he say?' asked hareton.

'he told me to begone as fast as i could,' she answered.  'but he looked
so different from his usual look that i 
 
 ___________________________
 
mr. lockwood, i cannot
express what a terrible start i got by the momentary view!  those deep
black eyes!  that smile, and ghastly paleness!  it appeared to me, not
mr. heathcliff, but a goblin; and, in my terror, i let the candle bend
towards the wall, and it left me in darkness.

'yes, close it,' he replied, in his familiar voice.  'there, that is pure
awkwardness!  why did you hold the candle horizontally?  be quick, and
bring another.'

i hurried out in a foolish state of dread, and said to joseph--'the
master wishes you to take him a light and rekindle the fire.'  for i
dared not go in myself again just then.

joseph rattled some fire into the shovel, and went: but he brought it
back immediately, with the supper-tray in his other hand, explaining that
mr. heathcliff was going to bed, and he wanted nothing to eat till
morning.  we heard him mount the stairs directly; he did not proceed to
his ordinary chamber, but turned into that with the panelled bed: its
window, as i mentioned before,
 
 ___________________________
 
to the garden, as
soon as i could see, to ascertain if there were any footmarks under his
window.  there were none.  'he has stayed at home,' i thought, 'and he'll
be all right to-day.'  i prepared breakfast for the household, as was my
usual custom, but told hareton and catherine to get theirs ere the master
came down, for he lay late.  they preferred taking it out of doors, under
the trees, and i set a little table to accommodate them.

on my re-entrance, i found mr. heathcliff below.  he and joseph were
conversing about some farming business; he gave clear, minute directions
concerning the matter discussed, but he spoke rapidly, and turned his
head continually aside, and had the same excited expression, even more
exaggerated.  when joseph quitted the room he took his seat in the place
he generally chose, and i put a basin of coffee before him.  he drew it
nearer, and then rested his arms on the table, and looked at the opposite
wall, as i supposed, surveying one particular portion, up and
 
 ___________________________
 
u persevered in your obstinate fast, and died by that
means, and they refused to bury you in the precincts of the kirk?' i
said, shocked at his godless indifference.  'how would you like it?'

'they won't do that,' he replied: 'if they did, you must have me removed
secretly; and if you neglect it you shall prove, practically, that the
dead are not annihilated!'

as soon as he heard the other members of the family stirring he retired
to his den, and i breathed freer.  but in the afternoon, while joseph and
hareton were at their work, he came into the kitchen again, and, with a
wild look, bid me come and sit in the house: he wanted somebody with him.
i declined; telling him plainly that his strange talk and manner
frightened me, and i had neither the nerve nor the will to be his
companion alone.

'i believe you think me a fiend,' he said, with his dismal laugh:
'something too horrible to live under a decent roof.'  then turning to
catherine, who was there, and who drew behind me at his approac
 
 ___________________________
 
 on the sill; no blood
trickled from the broken skin, and when i put my fingers to it, i could
doubt no more: he was dead and stark!

i hasped the window; i combed his black long hair from his forehead; i
tried to close his eyes: to extinguish, if possible, that frightful,
life-like gaze of exultation before any one else beheld it. they would
not shut: they seemed to sneer at my attempts; and his parted lips and
sharp white teeth sneered too! taken with another fit of cowardice, i
cried out for joseph. joseph shuffled up and made a noise, but
resolutely refused to meddle with him.

'th' divil's harried off his soul,' he cried, 'and he may hev' his
carcass into t' bargin, for aught i care!  ech! what a wicked 'un he
looks, girning at death!' and the old sinner grinned in mockery.  i
thought he intended to cut a caper round the bed; but suddenly composing
himself, he fell on his knees, and raised his hands, and returned thanks
that the lawful master and the ancient stock were restored to their
 
 ___________________________
 
sed the phantoms from thinking, as
he traversed the moors alone, on the nonsense he had heard his parents
and companions repeat.  yet, still, i don't like being out in the dark
now; and i don't like being left by myself in this grim house: i cannot
help it; i shall be glad when they leave it, and shift to the grange.

'they are going to the grange, then?' i said.

'yes,' answered mrs. dean, 'as soon as they are married, and that will be
on new year's day.'

'and who will live here then?'

'why, joseph will take care of the house, and, perhaps, a lad to keep him
company.  they will live in the kitchen, and the rest will be shut up.'

'for the use of such ghosts as choose to inhabit it?' i observed.

'no, mr. lockwood,' said nelly, shaking her head.  'i believe the dead
are at peace: but it is not right to speak of them with levity.'

at that moment the garden gate swung to; the ramblers were returning.

'_they_ are afraid of nothing,' i grumbled, watching their approach
through the window.  '
 
 ___________________________
 
together, they would brave satan and all his
legions.'

as they stepped on to the door-stones, and halted to take a last look at
the moon--or, more correctly, at each other by her light--i felt
irresistibly impelled to escape them again; and, pressing a remembrance
into the hand of mrs. dean, and disregarding her expostulations at my
rudeness, i vanished through the kitchen as they opened the house-door;
and so should have confirmed joseph in his opinion of his
fellow-servant's gay indiscretions, had he not fortunately recognised me
for a respectable character by the sweet ring of a sovereign at his feet.

my walk home was lengthened by a diversion in the direction of the kirk.
when beneath its walls, i perceived decay had made progress, even in
seven months: many a window showed black gaps deprived of glass; and
slates jutted off here and there, beyond the right line of the roof, to
be gradually worked off in coming autumn storm